Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/2216/
Cites: ['The Factories Act, 1948\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 3177 - Full Document', "The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 3879 - Full Document", 'Article 14 in The Constitution Of India 1949 [Constitution]\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 34602', 'Section 2 in The Factories Act, 1948 [Complete Act]\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 640', 'The Tuticorin Thermal Power ... vs The Deputy Regional Director, ... on 26 April, 2005\nMadras High Court Cites 8 - Cited by 3 - Full Document', 'the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 2455 - Full Document', 'The Banking Regulation (Amendment) And Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2004\nCentral Government Act Cites 0 - Cited by 153 - Full Document', 'Article 226 in The Constitution Of India 1949 [Constitution]\nCentral Government Act Cites 5 - Cited by 205202', 'The Kumbakonam Milk Supply ... vs The Regional Director, ... on 11 April, 2003\nMadras High Court Cites 17 - Cited by 2 - Full Document']
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Madras High Court
The Management Of Kumar Medical ... vs Employees State Insurance ... on 25 August, 2011
       

  

  

 
 
 BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT

DATED: 25/08/2011

CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE VINOD K.SHARMA

W.P.(MD)No.11463 of 2008
and
M.P.(MD)No.1 of 2008

The Management of Kumar Medical Centre,
(Wholesale Pharmaceutical Distributors)
51 East of Tower,
Nagercoil 629 001.
Rep. by its Proprietor Mr.P.Kumaraswamy ... Petitioner

Vs.

Employees State Insurance Corporation,
(Sub Regional Office, (Tirunelveli)
Municipal Shooping Complex,
Salai Street,
Sindupponthurai,
Tirunelveli 627 001.
Rep. by its Assistant Director.         ... Respondents

PRAYER

Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying to issue a Writ of  Certiorari, to call for the records of the
respondent in Proceedings No/6630706/INS/SRO/TLI and quash its order, dated
13.10.2008.

!For Petitioner  ... Mrs.T.Malini
^For Respondent  ...  Mr.P.Sermakani

:ORDER
The petitioner has approached this court, with a prayer for issuance of a writ, in the nature of certiorari, to quash the notice, covering the petitioner under ESI Act.
2.The impugned notice reads as under:-
Web site:www.esiindia.org              Phone:0462-2332106
         www.esic.nic.in                     0462-2332105

E-mail: esicsrothi@dateone.in          Fax:  046202332107

SUB-REGIONAL OFFICE (TIRUNELVELI)
EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURNCE CORPORATION
MINICIPAL SHOOPING COMPLEX
SALAI STREET, SINDUPPONTHURAI
TIRUNELVELI-627 001.

No/66/30706/34/INS/SRO/TLI            Date: 13/10/08

To,

M/s.Kumar Medical Centre,
    51, East of Tower,
    Nagercoil-629 001.

Sir,

 Sub: Coverage of the Unit under ESI Act 1948-Reg.
 Ref: Your letter, dated 1/9/2008.
With reference to your letter cited, above it is informed that preserving medicines under refrigeration amounts to manufacturing process with the aid of power under section 2(k) of the Factories Act. Therefore, the unit is coverable under section 2(12) read with section 2(14AA) of the EST Act.
It is hereby confirmed that your unit is coverable under the EST Act as stated in this office letter, dated 6/6/08. Immediate compliance is requested.
Yours faithfully, sd/-xxxx ASSITANT DIRECTOR (INSURANCE BRANCH)
3.The petitioner is a practicing Doctor, who is practicing in medicine. The petitioner in addition to practice also started business of wholesale distributorship, for the products of various pharmaceutical companies, like Glaxo India Limited, Cipla Limited, Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited, Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited, Zudus Cadila Limited,Lupin Pharmaceuticals Limited,Abbot Labs Limited, Anglo French Limited, Workhardt Limited, Eli Lilly & Company (I) Pvt., Limited, etc. The petitioner is a licensed stockist, under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940.
4.The petitioner stores the medicines in refrigerators and two coolers, and has employed 16 employees, including three pharmacists. The shop of the petitioner is established under the Tamil Nadu Shops & Commercial Establishments Act.
5.The petitioner is not covered under the Employees' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Act, as employees working with him are less than 20.
6.The impugned order has been passed, by invoking section 2(12) of the ESI Act, which defines the 'Factory' to mean as under:-
"(a)wherein ten or more persons are employed or were employed for wages on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power or it ordinarily so carried on or
(b)whereon twenty or more persons are employers or were employed for wages on any date of the preceding twelve months and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily carried on.
The term "manufacturing process" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Factories Act, 1948, Section 2(k)of the Factories Act, defines the terms "manufacturing process" to mean that;-
(i)making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing or otherwise treating or adopting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale transport, delivery or disposal; or
(ii)pumping oil, water sewage or any other substances; or
(iii)generating, transforming or transmitting power; or
(iv)composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, photogravure or other similar process or book binding; or
(v)constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or vessels; or
(vi)preserving or storing any article in cold storage.
7.The pleaded case of the petitioner is that though number of employees working with the petitioner are less than 20, the Inspector of ESI, visited the premises of the petitioner and reported, that as the refrigerators and coolers are used for storing some of the medicines, it amount to manufacturing process, therefore, the premises are covered under ESI Act.
8.The learned counsel for the petitioner challenged the impugned order, on the ground that there is no manufacturing process, carried out by the petitioner, therefore, premises of petitioner do not come under definition of 'factory'.
9.The refrigerators and coolers are only used to store the medicines for distribution/sell, under a license.
10.The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned order on the face of it is outcome of non-application of mind, and perverse, thus, hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, has challenged the maintainability of the writ petition, on the ground that the writ is premature, as notice has only been issued. It will be open to the petitioner, to take all the defenses available in reply.
12.It is also the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent that the use of refrigerators and coolers, in the premises of the petitioner amounts to manufacturing process, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this court, in the case of The Kumbakonam Milk Supply Cooperative Society, represented by its Secretary vs. The Regional Director, Employees' State Insurance Corporation, Madras [(2003)2 MLJ 349], wherein this court has pleased to lay down as under:-
"Sec.2(14AA) of the Act 'manufacturing process' shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Factories Act, 1948. Sec.2(k) of the Factories Act, 1948 defines the expression "manufacturing process" and we have already referred to the insertion of Clause (vi) of Sec.2(k) by Act 94 of 1976 which makes it clear that preserving or storing any article in cold storage is deemed to be a manufacturing process. Though it is stated that only two persons are being engaged in cold storage and others are messengers and their main work is to procure milk from its members, in the light of the definition of the words "employees", "factor" and "manufacturing process", as referred to in the Employees State Insurance Act, and the Factories Act and in the light of the details furnished in the documents produced by the society, that the appellant society is an establishment which comes within the ambit of Employees' State Insurance Act and that the learned District Judge was perfectly right in arriving at a conclusion, confirming the action initiated by the Employees' State Insurance Corporation.
The Employees' State Insurance Act is a piece of social welfare legislation enacted primarily with the object of providing certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and also to make provisions for certain other matters incidental thereto. In an enactment of this nature, the endeavour of the Court should be to interpret the provisions liberally in favour of the persons for whose benefit the enactment has been made. In the light of the statutory provisions of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 and the Factories Act, 1948, complied with the factual details available in the case on hand, the Court do not want to take a different view than that taken by the District Judge, and hence the Court in agreement with the conclusion arrived at by the learned District Judge."
13.The stand of the respondent is totally misconceived. The order impugned is not merely a notice, but an order confirming that the shop of the petitioner is covered under the ESI Act, as in the letter, dated 6th June 2008, directions have been issued to take steps under the ESI Act. The writ petition, therefore, cannot be said to be premature.
14.The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that keeping of the refrigerator and cooler would amount to manufacturing process, is again misconceived. The refrigerators or coolers are not used by the petitioner for carrying out any manufacturing process, but for storage for sale, in view of the nature of particular medicine, for the benefit of the customer. The judgments relied upon is regarding preserving the article in cold storage, which cannot be equated to the ordinary refrigerator.
15.If the contention of the respondent is accepted, then every household would become a manufacturing process, as the refrigerators are keeping for storage of household goods for use. The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent, can have no application to use of refrigerator or cooler for the purposes of storage of medicine, nor it can be termed as a manufacturing process.
16.The learned counsel for the respondent challenged the maintainability of the writ, on account of alternative remedy under section 75 of the ESI Act, by placing reliance on the Division Bench Judgment of this court, in the case of the Tuticorin Thermal Power Station Industrial Cooperative Society Ltd., Tuticorin vs. The Deputy Regional Director etc., & others [2005 Writ L.R.332].
17.There can be no dispute with the proposition laid down by the Hon'be Division Bench judgment of this court that alternative remedy is a ground to non-suit the petitioner. It is always equally well settled that alternative remedy is not a complete bar, specially when writ petition, is admitted.
18.The writ petition was admitted in the year 2008, therefore, at this stage, it would not be appropriate to relegate the petitioner to alternative remedy, under section 75 of the ESI Act, to challenge, the order which on the face of it is perverse, and also without jurisdiction, as the premises of the petitioner on admitted facts can not be covered under ESI Act.
19.It is an imagination of the respondent that storing of medicine in the refrigerator will amounts to manufacturing process, by equating ordinary refrigerator with cold storage, which in itself is an industry.
20.The impugned order on the face of it is perverse, arbitrary and outcome of colourable exercise of power, thus, hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
21.While rejecting the plea of the respondent, that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed, for alternative remedy, it is appropriate to notice that in-spite of the Hon'ble Division Bench judgment of this court, in the case of the Tuticorin thermal Power Station Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd., vs. The Deputy Regional Director etc., [2005 Writ L.R.332], writ petitions are filed, in this court, by not disclosing the statutory remedies available to the petitioner and all the writ petitions are entertained and admitted by ignoring the availability of alternative statutory remedy. The objection to maintainability is only taken at final hearing, that is after number of years. The office should make a note about availability of alternative statutory remedy, so that question of maintainability of writ can be decided at the time of admission of writ.
22.As already observed, the impugned order on the face of it, is arbitrary and outcome of non-application of mind and thus, hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
23.The writ petition is allowed, the impugned order is set aside.
24.Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed. But with no order as to costs.
er
