Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/4371/
Cites: ['Article 227 in The Constitution Of India 1949 : https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1331149/', 'Article 226 in The Constitution Of India 1949 : https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1712542/', 'The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 : https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1953529/']
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Jharkhand High Court
Chandra Bhushan Ravi vs The Food Corporation Of India on 3 September, 2009
                            W.P.(S) No. 2134 of 2002
     [ In the matter of an Application Under Article 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India ]
                                             ....
            Chandra Bhushan Ravi             .....     .....     ....      ....       Petitioner
                                         --Versus--
            1. Food Corporation of India
            2. The Zonal Manager (East), Food Corporation of India,
               Calcutta -17
            3. The District Manager, Food Corporation of India,
               District Office, Hazaribagh   ....     ....     .....   Respondents
                                         ....
            For the Petitioner           :   Ms. Niki Sinha
            For the Respondents          :   Mr. N. Bakshi


                           PRESENT
            HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AMARESHWAR SAHAY

By Court             The petitioner has sought to challenge the order as

            contained in Annexure -4 passed by his Disciplinary Authority on

            12.9.2000
by which he has been removed from service of the Food Corporation of India in exercise of powers conferred by Regulation 56 and Appendix-II of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulation 1971 on the basis of an Enquiry Report submitted by the Enquiry Officer after conclusion of departmental enquiry. The petitioner also prays for quashing of the order contained in Annexure -6 dated 09.10.2001 i.e. the order passed by the Appellate Authority by which the appeal filed by the petitioner against his dismissal from service has been rejected.
The background facts are that for recruitment of SC/ST candidates, for Category-III posts, an advertisement was published in October, 1996 by the Food Corporation of India, and accordingly, a written test was held on 19.1.1997. Successful candidates were called for personal interview on different dates in the month of March, 1997 including the petitioner and thereafter a Merit List / Panel was prepared in which the name of the petitioner also appeared. The petitioner was offered appointment by order contained in Letter dated 17.4.1997 directing him to report at the District Office, Food Corporation of India, Hazaribagh. The petitioner joined his duty on 15.5.1997 on the post of Assistant grade-III(D) in the District Office, Food Corporation of India at Hazaribagh.
After completion of recruitment work, a Committee was constituted by the Regional Office, Patna on 27.6.1997 to scrutinize the Admit Cards, Attestation Forms and their Photographs, etc with the paper of joining report of the newly recruited employees in Food Corporation of India. The committee checked the relevant papers and detected certain objectionable matters against various candidates including the petitioner. Against the petitioner, it was found that his photograph pasted on the Admit card did not tally with the photograph furnished by him with the Attestation form at the time of his joining in Food Corporation of India on 15.5.1997. It was also detected that the signature of the petitioner available on the Attendance Sheet dated 27.3.1997 prepared at the time of interview was not tallying with his signature on his joining report and Attestation form submitted by him on 15.5.1997. On detection of such forgery, the signature of the petitioner was again taken and was verified with the signature on Attendance Sheet dated 27.3.1997 as well as with the signature put by him on the joining report. The photograph of the petitioner on the Attestation form, and the photograph available on the Admit card of the petitioner were also verified. On verification, it was found that the photograph affixed on Admit card of Roll No. 11050251 dated 19.1.1997 was not tallying with the photograph affixed on the Attestation form. Even the signature on the Admit card in the name of the petitioner did not tally with the signature available on the Attendance sheet. Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Director, Government Examiner of Questioned Documents, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Kolkata for verification and report. A report was submitted by the Government experts that the signature on the Attendance sheet at the time of appearing for personal interview on 27.3.1997 was not tallying with the signature put by the petitioner on his joining report submitted on 15.5.1997. The photograph on the Attestation form, also did not tally with the photograph on the Admit Card. Thereafter, a departmental proceeding was initiated against the petitioner for the charges that he after conspiracy acted as an impostor and managed to secure service on the post of Assistant grade-III(D) in the Food Corporation of India by adopting corrupt practice/ unfair means at the time of personal interview on 27.3.1997.
The petitioner after notice submitted his written statement and contested the charge in the Departmental Enquiry.
As it appears, on behalf of the Department, six witnesses were examined and several documents were adduced in evidence including the report of the Handwriting Expert as well as on the Attendance sheet, Attestation Form, Joining Report, etc. After conclusion of the Departmental Enquiry, a report was submitted by the Enquiry Officer to the Disciplinary authority holding that the charges against the petitioner was found to be proved. After perusing the relevant papers and the Enquiry report, the Disciplinary authority by order as contained in Annexure -4 dated 12.9.2000 passed an order for removal of the petitioner from service.
Thereafter, the petitioner preferred a departmental appeal, which was disposed of by order dated 9.10.2001 as contained in Annexure-6 by the Zonal Manager (East), who by a reasoned order, dismissed the appeal filed by the petitioner. It is, these two orders, contained in Annexure-4 and Annexure-6, which are being challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition. Ms. Niki Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the charge against the petitioner was that he arranged another person to appear in the interview on 27.3.1997 in his place and he signed on the Attendance sheet at the time of Oral interview, but this fact was not established by providing any evidence in the departmental proceeding. She further submitted that the person who prepared the Attendance sheet, and the person who obtained the signature of the petitioner were not examined by the Department, and therefore, it cannot be said that the charges were established against the petitioner. Lastly, it is submitted that the punishment of removal from service is disproportionate to the charges against the petitioner.
On the other hand, Mr. N. Bakshi, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Corporation, submitted that the standard of proof in a Domestic or Departmental Enquiry is quite different from the standards of proof in any criminal trial. The Domestic / Departmental enquiry, held on the basis of preponderance of probability, whereas in the criminal trial, the charge is to be established beyond all reasonable doubt. He also submitted that the provision of Evidence Act is not applicable so far as the Departmental proceeding is concerned, and therefore, the strict proof of the charge as required in a criminal trial is not required in a Departmental proceeding. He further submitted that by sufficient oral and documentary evidence, the charge against the petitioner was found to be established, and therefore, after considering the gravity of the misconduct committed by the petitioner, he was removed from the service. For such grave misconduct, the appropriate punishment is removal from service, therefore it cannot be said to be excessive.
From perusal of the Enquiry Report which has been annexed as Annexure-2 to the writ petition, it appears that the Oral as well as Documentary evidence have been discussed therein in detail. It further appears from the said report that the Deputy Government Examiner of Questioned Documents, Central Forensic Institute, Government of India, Kolkata, submitted his report, which was exhibited during the enquiry, whereas he reported that the signature put on the Attestation Sheet prepared at the time of interview was not tallying with the signature put on the papers submitted at the time of joining of the service by the petitioner. On consideration of the evidence, it was found by the Enquiry Officer, that the petitioner arranged another person to appear in the interview on 27.3.1997 in place of himself who had signed in the Attendance sheet at the time of Oral interview. Government Examiner also deposed during the enquiry.
It is on the basis of overwhelming evidence on the record the enquiry officer held that the charges stood established.
I find from the impugned order of the Appellate court that after application of mind, and on consideration of the relevant materials on record, he has concurred that the findings arrieved at by the Disciplinary Authority relying on the Enquiry report. It is settled law that if in any departmental proceeding / domestic enquiry, on the basis of the evidence on record, findings on fact is arrieved at, then this Court should not substitute its own findings, in exercise of Supervisory Jurisdiction under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, and the findings on facts cannot be disturbed by reappraisal of the entire evidence afresh, unless it is shown that the findings on facts arrieved at are perverse in nature or are against the materials on record. Reference in this regard is made in the case of Syed Yakoob Versus K. S. Radhakrishnan & Others, reported in (A.I.R. 1964 SC 477) and which has been relied and reiterated in a subsequent recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Cholan Roadways Ltd. Versus G. Thirugnanasambandam, reported in [(2005) 3 SCC 241].
In view of the discussions and findings as above, I do not find force in the submission advanced by the petitioner. I do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned orders. The punishment of removal from service also cannot be said to be disproportionate to the charge in view of its gravity. Such employee who indulges in such an activity as has been found to be done in the present case, does not require sympathetic consideration. Accordingly, I do not find any merit in this writ petition, and the same is dismissed. However, there will be no order as to costs.
(AMARESHWAR SAHAY, J.) Jharkhand High Court, Ranchi The 03rd of September, 2009 N.A.F.R./S.I.
