Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1602/
Cites: []
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Lok Sabha Debates
Budget General, 1998-1999 - General Discussion And Demand For Excess ... on 10 June, 1998
nt> Title: Budget General, 1998-99 -General Discussion and Demand for Excess Grants (General).
18.57 hours GENERAL BUDGET , 1998-99- GENERAL DISCUSSION AND DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS, (1995-96)-GENERAL MR. CHAIRMAN : Now we will take up the General Budget.
Motion moved :
" That the respective excess sums not exceeding the amounts shown in the third column of the Order Paper be granted to the President out of the Consolidated Fund of india to make good the excess on the respective grants during the year ended 31st day of March, 1996 in respect of the following demands entered in the second column thereof :
Demand Nos. 13,14,17, 65 and 81."
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Mr. Chairman, Sir, on first June, the hon. Finance Minister started his Budget Speech and when he finished the Speech at seven o'clock, almost this time, I think from this side of the House I was the first to go and shake hands with him and congratulate him. When I was hearing the Budget, I thought it was a benign, nice and good budget, but next morning when I read the newspapers and when I went deep into the papers which I had collected, I was shocked. What the Budget Speech of Shri Sinha revealed here was okay but what it really concealed in the papers...(Interruptions)
SHRI SOMNATH CHATTERJEE : Hidden agenda.
SHRI MURLI DEORA :...and the hidden agenda was really disastrous. I remember when Shri Vajpayee had sent the list of the Ministers to the President - that fine morning Shri Khurana was there and I myself went to the swearing-in ceremony - in the Mumbai newspapers there was a big article saying that there seemed to be some confusion between Shri Jaswant Singh and Shri Yashwant Sinha.
18.58 hrs (Mr. Speaker in the Chair) I do not know who would have been better, but I for one welcomed the appointment Shri Yashwant Sinha. But then I read something which really pained me. I am seriously saying this. I read that since Shri Jaswant Singh is pro-reforms so the orders from the top were there that he should not be the Finance Minister, and here my friend Shri Yashwant Singh came. I could not believe, and I still do not believe, that Shri Yashwant Sinha could be anti-reforms, but when I read the Budget and when I see the measures that Shri Yashwant Sinha can take in his maiden Budget - last time he was not able to present the Budget - I am really shocked and I am only convinced that whatever articles came at that time, they were true and Shri Yashwant Sinha's Budget is sending a message to the entire world, to the entire international community that India is against reforms. The hon. Minister said about the budget's number one qualification that it is `simple', `saral'. I will come to that later. I just want to say that this is the first time in the history of the Indian Budget - at least for 12 to 14 years I have been attending the Budget presentation in this House - that within 24 hours after the Budget was presented, Govt. announced a massive fall in the prices of Petrol and Urea. I do not know whether Shri Yashwant Sinha has seen this front page cartoon of R.K. Laxman. I would like to read out one line: "We are lucky to have him. No other Minister brought down the prices within a few hours of announcing in the Budget." Just in one day! When the Opposition Members got up on their seats, I do not know what was the reason which provoked Shri Yashwant Sinha, the hon. Finance Minister, a veteran parliamentarian and a veteran bureaucrat, to lose all his cool and how he came forward with the statement that those who sit in the glass houses should not throw stones at others. This was not expected of him. There was a mistake. There was a bungling done between your Department and the Ministry of Petroleum. Earlier they were saying: "We are not responsible, they are responsible".
19.00 hrs. But now, if you see some of the latest reports which were published in the Indian Express day before yesterday, they clearly said that there was a mistake. One should agree. Now, they are saying that Shri Manmohan Singh had raised it in 1994, so they have also raised. These are not the excuses. So, my point is that there was a lack of coordination between the Finance Ministry and other Ministries at the time of the Budget,preparation which I hope the Minister has taken note of and he will see that it is repaired. The Minister withdrew Rs. 3 extra charge on the petroleum products, but the Minister is still making an issue of not withdrawing the total price hike in respect of urea.
Today, if we see the Economic Survey, we find that the growth in agricultural production is negative. What message are we going to send to Indian farmers? The first Budget of this Government is raising the price of urea. I would request the hon. Finance Minister not to make a prestige issue of the urea prices ....(Interruptions) Even their own allies and some friends of mine here have interest of farmers in their heart. I do not claim to know so much about farmers, as you know very well that I come from an urban city. ....(Interruptions) I would request the hon. Finance Minister to please roll back the urea price to its originality.
Sir, this morning, in Delhi, some people came to us. Shri Madan Lal Khurana is elected from Delhi. I do not know he is elected for how many years. God knows. Nobody remembers the years. ....(Interruptions). I was shocked to see that the very traders, the mithaiwalas, who are engaged in making sweets, are up in arms against the BJP Government. These are the people who were supporting the BJP. Shri Khurana is from Delhi. He may find out what has happened. All the mithaiwalas, Haldi Ram, Chandu Halwai etc. say that there is no coordination. What the Minister said in the speech here and what come in Gazette the next day from the Excise Inspector do not tally. I would like to read one line from there "... shifted to any ready for consumption form if manufactured in factory." That is what it is shifted to now. The idea in his Budget speech was "...branded goods manufactured in factories." How are those who make laddoos, pedas, and bhujia are branded? I know what he will say. I believe that when some MPs of the Congress and other parties met him today, he told them about Rs. 15 lakh ceiling. If there is a sale of Rs. 15,000 a day, this ceiling of Rs. 15 lakh is nothing today. So, I would request the Finance Minister to look into it even though he himself does not eat sweets. I do not know whether Shrimati Sinha will give him any sweets - he does not deserve any sweet - and I do not think that she will dare to go to the market and buy sweets now because he has come down heavily on these traders.
....(Interruptions) I know that Shri Khurana is very fond of sweets. He is also supporting him. ....(Interruptions)
Sir, I would say that this issue of eight per cent excise - maybe it was not intentional, I do not think that Shri Yashwant Sinha can have the intention of levying excise on sweetmakers - should be settled. On the 1st June, by 8.30 in the evening, the Excise Inspectors visited some of the mithaiwalas in Mumbai and you are saying that the Budget is saral. I would give two more examples. So, I would request him to please really simplify it, and not by way of speech. I am sure that he will very soon see that the matter of excise on mithaiwalas and other things are settled down.
The other anomaly is that the Finance Minister has put 8 per cent ad valorem on the import of every material. It is a countervailing duty, CVD. When he spoke at the time of presenting the Budget, I also realised that 8 per cent was on a higher side and accepted it for we want to give protection to Indian industries. Yes, we are for it.
But has he calculated as to how much it really comes to? I am sure he knows that. Even the minimum will be 11.9 per cent, because ad valorem of 34 per cent means 8 per cent of that 134 per cent. So, it is more than 12 per cent. In some cases, it is going upto 26 or 27 per cent. So, it works out to a one-third increase. I do not think that this is a time when the Indian industries can afford to bear so much incidence of additional duties. The hon. Finance Minister has not raised the direct taxes like the income tax. It is good. But a heavy incidence of additional indirect taxes is not good. This will really cause inflation.
Sir, I welcomed the statement of Shri Yashwant Sinha, when he just assumed office as the Finance Minister, that there was a need to ease the credit supply, the SRR and SLR of the Reserve Bank of India. I know that the moment he became the Finance Minister, he eased the credit supply because so much of credit was required for the industry. In order to curtail the inflation, the earlier Governments had put a very tight money policy. So, what he has done is good. But by imposing so much of indirect taxes - which the other earlier Governments were warning him, he may remember - the inflation will reach the double digit mark very soon. Will the country afford this high inflation? When a person is in the bracket of Rs. Two lakh and suppose the maximum income tax rate is 40 per cent, if it is raised by 10 per cent, he will pay 10 per cent more and that means Rs.20,000/- more. But as far as the indirect taxes are concerned, even somebody who is earning Rs.500/per month, or somebody who is out of job, will have to pay more because the excise duty has a cascading effect. Everybody who buys anything will have to pay this excise duty. So, I would request the hon. Finance Minister to please make his calculations again and this amount over Rs.8,000 crore Rs.5,000 crore and Rs.3,000 crore from both the excise duties and the countervailing duties respectively - which he is estimating is a gross under-estimation. Maybe, he may like to take the credit later on, at the end of the year by saying that the estimation was Rs.8,000 crore, but he had collected Rs.34,000 crore.
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (SHRI YASHWANT SINHA): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am really surprised because his colleagues in the other House were saying that it was a gross over-estimation.
SHRI MURLI DEORA (MUMBAI SOUTH): It does not matter. Everyone has his own opinion. I know that some of my colleagues have said that this tight money policy was good in order to curtail inflation. I personally believe that he must curtail inflation, but not at the cost of growth. Interest rates should be high enough to encourage savings, but not so much high so as to discourage investments. Today when the interest rate is so high, people would like to put their money on fixed deposits, chit funds etc., and nobody will put their money in business. There will not be any entrepreneurship left. Why should they do it? Why should they take the risk? So, now he did a right thing. Earlier, even some people have said that. Even Dr. Manmohan Singh said that. A little bit of moderate increase in the rate of inflation is all right. But now this huge increase in the rate of indirect taxes will cause a severe setback on the price rise. So, the hon. Finance Minister should be careful, calculate again I am sure he will agree with me if he calculates again - and bring down the countervailing duty and the excise duty to some extent and exempt other things.
Sir, there is a system of MODVAT - Shri Somnath Chatterjee will recall - which was introduced in this very House. This is an indirect tax system followed all over the world. Actually it was delayed in India; it should have come earlier. The companies which are honest, maintain their accounts properly. They get a setback of 100 per cent return when the other tax is given to them, which they call MODVAT refund. I am shocked to see that a person like Shri Yashwant Sinha can make a law for that because some people are misusing this system. Instead of 100 per cent MODVAT refund, now it is only 95 per cent. He is penalising honest taxpayers for the fault of others. The Government should take action against those who are misusing this system. Just because somebody is misusing the system he is giving a refund of only 95 per cent. Even if that five per cent is taken, it means so much. It is not a correct way of taxing.
It is like a person who has taken a loan of Rs.100 but is giving back Rs.95. That is not fair. I do not know whether the hon. Minister's people have told him that. Sometimes one person makes the raw material, the other person makes the finished product, and the third person makes the packaging. So, the same product is going to three places and everywhere he will lose five per cent. Where will the money come from? I do not think you are advised properly. What I know of Shri Yashwant Sinha - I used to sit near him in the J.P.C. - I do not think that he can make such a mistake. But maybe, he is over-worked, getting tired and losing his temperament. But I am sure now he will cool down a little bit. If he follows the hidden agenda, it will be too much and we know that he does not believe in that. We all know that. So, I would request the hon. Finance Minister to please see that these anomalies are corrected.
Sir, this is the first time that eight per cent CVT is levied where it is not levied on one section of people but levied on another section of people. I do not know whether he knows it. The tax is not levied on the trading. But where are the traders? The traders are up in arms against you people. Please believe me. I know Mumbai. Mumbai is also a city of traders. I come from South Mumbai. You know that. I am not talking politics. I am only requesting you. Suppose, somebody is importing raw material for his factory. Shri Khurana, if he imports directly, for Rs.100 he has to pay Rs.8 extra. When there is a trading company - of his own or somebody else or fabricated and it imports the raw material, it is better placed. I am telling you this is true. What is this? You are encouraging the people to be dishonest. I know that it is not your intention. Either you do not have the tax or have the tax on every one. Why do you want the industries who are engaged in manufacturing to start the trading activities? That is not their job.
SHRI SOMNATH CHATTERJEE : You have made your point and Shri Madan Lal Khurana has agreed... (Interruptions).
SHRI KHARABELA SWAIN (BALASORE): Sir, one gentleman is speaking and the other person is giving a running commentary ... (Interruptions)
  श्री चन्द्रमणि त्रिपाठी (रीवा): हम नये हैं तो हमारे लिए मैनर्स हैं और ये पुराने हैं तो इनके लिए कोई मैनर्स नहीं हैं।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) SHRI KHARABELA SWAIN : What example is he setting to a new Member like me? ... (Interruptions).
SHRI SOMNATH CHATTERJEE : He is teaching me lesson. He must learn the manners before he enters this House. He is teaching manners to me. He will dictate me ... (Interruptions)
MR. SPEAKER: Shri Somnath Chatterjee is not disturbing him. He is assisting him.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : These measures of such a heavy indirect burden on the economy has come at a time when the economy can least afford it. Mr. Finance Minister knows that. There is a terrible recession in the Indian market today. I will give you two-three examples. My friends might be knowing that several things like motor vehicle, scooters, etc. were not available easily and we used to give a certificate to get quick delivery of trucks. Today, do you know what is happening? The production of Ashok Leyland in Chennai, which is one of the biggest truck-making companies, has come down by 75 per cent. Same is the case with TELCO whose production has come down by 45 per cent.
It is because they cannot sell the trucks. I read day before yesterday that 11,000 people were laid off in Chennai because they could not sell their trucks. At such a time, if you have another increase of Rs. 23,000 or Rs. 24,000, I do not know how much it will come to, how will they be able to sell? First, we must create a demand. Suppose, there was a demand, there was no stock in their godowns and the people were able to sell, yes, you must raise more taxes; you must earn more from those who are earning more. But this is not the time to levy such heavy taxes. I have hundreds of such examples which I can give you. But I do not want to do that now. This will have a cascading effect. So, please see that this does not happen.
Let us see how Shri Yashwant Sinha's Budget has been received by the people at large and the economists in India and abroad. I had the privilege to see, Mr. Speaker, some of his interviews, and I must compliment him for the way he has defended some of the measures that he has taken. But how has he scuttled, I do not know whether intentionally or unintentionally, some of the burning issues? It has to be `intentionally' because Shri Sinha is a smart man. He knows the art of Budget-making; he knows the art of bureaucracy because he himself was a bureaucrat.
I would like to bring to the notice of the House as to how the international community has reacted to Shri Sinha's Budget. I know that he has given interviews to all these four people. I am quoting the Times of India. Shri J. Mulraj is the main person who writes for the Times of India. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I quote :
"The Union Budget presented on June 1 does nothing for the economy. It is a thoughtless, idealess and uninspiring Budget."
I am sure that the Finance Minister is not only sensitive about what the Members of Parliament are talking about but also to this. Very recently, I saw the hon. Minister's interview given to Shri Menon of the Business Standard. I will only read one line from the editorial of the Business Standard. I quote :
"Yashwant Sinha's maiden Budget has disappointed the reformers like me, the stock-market -- I am connected with the stock-market also, and many economists -- I am not an economist."
Sir, I can tell you that the report appeared in the Economist of London is shocking. I am sure, you have got all these cuttings. I am sure, you know as to what is happening around the world. It says :
"India's post-nuclear test Budget was timid, politically motivated and is already starting to unravel."
I do not think that you are interested in such compliments. Lord Meghnath Desai is an Indian-born Member of the House of Lords in England. He is not a Congressman and he does not belong to any party. Lord Meghnath Desai has written and I quote :
"Mr. Sinha has lost an opportunity. He has missed the first chance and may never get another."
I am sure, he knows that even though he was a Finance Minister earlier, he was not able to present the Budget. He has presented the Budget this time but he should know that his colleague, Shri Jaswant Singh, is back in the other House. I am not giving any reasons, and I am only trying to appeal to him very humbly to see that these anomalies are corrected. Sir, the biggest effect of the Budget was on the capital market. When I talk about the stock exchange, I would like to tell some of my young colleagues who are here that I know stock exchange . Against the total market capitalisation of over Rs. 5,10,000 crore, 11 per cent market has fallen. You know that the Sensex has fallen by 11 per cent within a period of five to six days, that is, from June 1 to June 5. I do not think that it has ever happened where the investors have lost over Rs. 55,000 crore. Mr. Speaker, whatever figures I am giving here, I mean it. There is no mistake of any zero here. It means that the investors have lost Rs. 55,000 crore, and one-third of these shares are held by financial institutions like UTI, LIC, GIC, IDBI, ICICI. Who are the owners of that? It is not the Government, but it is the policy-holders. If you are a LIC policy-holder, the money belongs to you.
So, never in the history of India, a Budget has cast such devastating effect on the capital market. I agree with him. It is not only because of the Budget but there are other reasons too where Shri Yashwant Sinha has not much to do. I agree with him. He has to share the agony with other colleagues. I would like to give some suggestions on the capital market.
First of all, the biggest reason after your Budget was the possibility of the economic sanctions which the American Government had announced. There is total confusion about what will be the economic sanctions on us. Some Minister is saying that there is no economic sanction. Some other Minister is saying that there will be economic sanctions. You know what is happening in the Ministry. All that took a full day. You know it Shri Yashwant Sinha. When the Modis and Standards Report came, that really gave a big jolt to the Indian stock market, 110 to 111 points going down in one single day. Day before yesterday, FIIs helped Sensex cut losses. You know it, Shri Yashwant Sinha. If the UTI, ICICI and LIC were not buying the shares, the Sensex would have come down by 220 points. What are you doing about it? I am telling you the real reason for that. Shri Madan Lal Khurana, here you can help him. Unfortunately, the other Harvard man is not here. One Harvard Finance Minister was enough. I would like to read from the newspaper. This is a serious thing. I am not bringing politics. If I am wrong, correct me. I am not criticising him. I am here to cooperate and help. I am saying what was the real reason for downgrading India's credit rating which hurt the market and which is hurting it further, because the second report of Modis and poor is going to come very soon. I am reading one line which is quoted in all the newspapers. I am sure you have it. I quote from "The Indian Express" Mumbai June 5: -
'Indications regarding the BJP Government's position on such critical issues as trade and investment liberalisation were often contradictory.
Every one knows that. I do not blame Shri Yashwant Sinha. We see every day here the statements of Ms Jayalalitha and Shri George Fernandes and other people. I now quote from the newspaper: -
"In addition, the mix of political parties and personalities that made up the new Government seemed inherently unstable raising the potential for yet another transition."
It means temporary Government. I am not saying temporary Government. I am trying to say the impression, if it is cleared that the Government is temporary and unstable, you know what happens to the economy.
I would very humbly request the hon. Finance Minister to put his colleagues together. They should speak with one voice on what is happening to the economic reforms, whether you allow foreign participation in this field or not. Somebody is saying potato chips and micro chips. What is the IBM? When Shri George Fernandes threw IBM with Coco Cola-- I am not talking about Coco cola -- do you know how much technological advancement our country had lost? Nobody is remembering that. Today also BJP people are talking that we are all for micro chips, not for potato chips. IBM is not for potato chips. I am trying to give only this one example. Please correct this anomaly, Mr. Finance Minister.
Another reason was fall in the price of Indian rupee. Lastly, Mr. Finance Minister, you were replying to my question sitting here. I told you that day. You know what is the price today. It is over Rs.42/-. I am not blaming you. You can say that you were there in the Government for 50 years and what were you doing? I am not saying that. We are not scoring debating points here. I am trying to say that the situation has come in such a manner that the price of Indian rupee against the dollar is the lowest and it will go down further. It is stated in the same newspaper as follows: -
"Six months forward cover process 10 per cent."
I am sure you know that. Shri Madan Lal Khurana, if today it is Rs.42/-, if you buy the dollar against the Indian rupee after six months, you pay Rs.46/-. ४२ रुपये पर चार रुपये ४० पैसे और देने पड़ेंगे।
You must know where our economy is going.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: I will take just one minute. You are relating all these to the Budget.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Yes.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: I would like to inform you that the other Sensex, the Hangson of Hong Kong fell below the 80000 marks today. This is the first time in three years that it has touched that level.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Are you justifying that?
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: Yes. You are aware of the fact.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Yes, I know that. I am coming to that later.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: The Japanese Yen has touched a seven-year low. It was 141 yesterday.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : It is 135. I know that.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: These are the international surroundings.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Are you satisfied with that? I know that you are satisfied with that.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: I am not...(Interruptions)
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Since somebody has a fire in his house, you want that you should also have a small fire in your house. I know it.
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: Shri Murli Deora, I took you as a very well-informed person. So, I thought that I should bring these facts to your notice....(Interruptions)
SHRI MURLI DEORA : Kindly bear with me...(Interruptions)
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: I am just pointing out the facts. I am not taking any solace...(Interruptions)
SHRI MURLI DEORA : These are the points. I agree with you that in the Far-Eastern countries, Thailand, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong and Malaysia this had happened. But our economy is so much or a little bit inter-linked with them. Earlier, they had it but not now. In our case, why is it happening today only after the Budget? The Indonesian rupaiah had gone down by 272 per cent. Thailand, Malaysia and all these countries suffered loss six or eight months back. At that time, our rupee was not affected so much. It was affected very little. I would request you not to take solace or consolation from the fact that there is a problem in the neighbour's house and so let me also have a problem in my house...(Interruptions) You are the Finance Minister of India. Please do not do it. I know you will not mean it.
I would request the hon. Finance Minister to do something to build the capital market. In his speech on page 14, para 44, he has said that he is bringing measures to strengthen the capital market. In five days, what measures has he brought to strengthen the capital market? I am sure, you know about it. Whatever measures he has brought, they have brought doom to the capital market. Mr. Minister, you have not been able to bring enough measures. Let us not score debating points again. I would request you to do something more. Maybe, you have done more. But it has failed and you see the result now. Now, please do something more.
I would like to tell you what you should do. There was news that the buy-back of shares by the companies would be allowed. Everybody knows about it. I saw Shri N.K. Singh, the Revenue Secretary's statement day before yesterday saying that buy-back of shares would have given a boost and that would have helped the capital market to grow. I know that you have a problem with your colleague, the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. You could have taken the help of Shri Khurana. He would have coordinated with you. Even the Revenue Secretary to the Government of India had made a statement day before yesterday saying that this issue pertained not to the Finance Ministry but to the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. That is exactly my charge. There is no coordination between the Ministries. If there is no proper coordination between the important Ministries, what would happen? We all know about it. Therefore, my request is that you should bring forth this measure which will help revive the stock-market and the capital market to some extent.
Now I come to the NRI investment. Mr. Minister, you have said that you have raised the ceiling on NRI investment. If a foreigner can buy more quantity of shares in a company, what would happen? Of course, we need foreign investment. Today, we have $9 billion of FI Investment in India which is worth about Rs.72,000 crore. It is $ 9 billion! During this time, there is the highest outflow of foreign exchange. I have the figures of Merryll & Lynch and all that. You know about all these things. So, I do not want to tell you about them. The highest amount of outflow of foreign exchange that happened in a single week is from first June to sixth June. I have got the figures. I do not want to bore the entire House with figures...(Interruptions) But I am trying to tell you to kindly arrest this outflow. Otherwise, our BoP position will go down. Our debt-servicing ratio will go up and this will land us into big problems.
Another point is, those who are the foreign investors, they are worried as to what will happen to them when they take back their profit or loss by disinvestment, if the rupee falls. It is because when they invested, the price of dollar was Rs. 36 and when they are selling it, the dollar price is Rs. 42. They are going to lose six rupees in that which comes to 11 to 12 per cent. Please allow them to cover their foreign exchange risk. I understand, it is not allowed. What I suggest is that for the foreign investment, the FIIs should be allowed the facility of forward cover by the RBI. This will limit their futuring. Please consider this issue, Mr. Finance Minister.
For last some year, we had seen hundreds of finance companies, plantation companies mushrooming by way of collective investment scheme. I do not want to tell the names of the companies. But some of the companies were there with Rs.50 lakh of paid up capital. Do you know, how much money they have raised? They raised Rs.700 crore. The hon. Finance Minister knows about this and something has been done. I understand, now the SEBI is monitoring that. Please tighten these laws. We cannot allow the poor, small investors to lose their hard earned money and savings in these companies. I think, you know, what happened in Mumbai. I do not want to take anybody's name. I am trying to say that this is the time when close monitoring by the SEBI or other institution is done. There should be awareness amongst the investors about the credit ratings in order to keep a control or check on these companies. The credit rating agencies should be asked to give a public credit rating. If a company has a bad rating the credit rating agency says that the company has got a credit rating of `C minus' and nobody should buy. We must educate our investors. They should not be allowed to sell their assets. I understand, most of these who were cheated were the small and poor investors in big cities and small towns, who sold their assets.
When we tested the nuclear device, there was an announcement by America about the sanctions against us. Even now, nobody knows whether the loans and assistance to India from the other agencies like the World Bank, ADB, IBRD will also get affected. I understand this as I read from the reports that the World Bank in these two weeks, had postponed twice the loans which were to be sanctioned to India. I had been to Washington. I am told, when it comes to actual voting and if America, Japan and one more country votes against the proposal, then India would not get back. This will have a very disastrous effect on our economy. I am sure, you know about it.
I will give one more suggestion. I remember, once Shri Indrajit Gupta had said in this House that over 12 billion dollars of un-utilised aid was in the pipeline. You know very well that we are paying commitment charges on that. Even though it is a small amount, yet we are paying a commitment charge on that. We must streamline the projects which are falling under the World Bank. Shri Sirpotdar, you may remember the case of the Water Supply and Sewerage Project of Bombay. When I was the Mayor of Mumbai. I had negotiated with the Finance Ministry about this project. Do you know, how much time did it take to get the money from the Finance Ministry and reimbursing the same to the Municipal Corporation of Mumbai? I think, the same problem is being faced by the Calcutta Tube Transport. Please streamline this Department at least now when many of our projects are in limbo or are hanging in the air because we do not know whether we are going to get the money or not. My suggestion to you is to please see those projects also which are there in the pipeline. In cases where money having been sanctioned is not disbursed, should be disbursed quickly. The beneficiaries should be helped in this regard.
Another point is, we should send the leaders of business community and not just diplomats and parliamentarians to the World Bank and other institutions around the world, especially to the Western world to tell our counterparts, "This was the necessity. India had to test this nuclear device. India does not mean to have a war.
Whatever strain the Government of India has, we should take that strain and go and tell this to the business counterparts because you know very well that in America and other countries -- Shri Somnath Chatterjee, you should be happy as a Communist -- what matters is business. I remember, I was in Europe at that time when the Tiananmen square massacre took place in Beijing where the Chinese Government killed hundreds of young students in that square in Beijing. Then the American Government had to come out with heavy sanctions against China. Everybody knows it. At that time, not only the American Government but the American people also supported those sanctions. But here, on this issue, the American Government is against us but the American people are not against us.
I was talking about China. What happened after that? In seven months, the U.S Secretary of State went there in China. What did he do? He gave them the MFN Status. He gave them the status of Most Favoured Nation. The same thing they were talking then.
Just now, the Chinese President landed in the Western part of America. He did not land in Los Angeles or San Francisco. He landed in Seattle, Washington straight because they are buying five billion dollars worth of Boeings. You know that. That is why, Mr. Bill Clinton is today going there.
Sir, India has a big market. India's largest trading partner today, is America. So, I would request you, hon. Mr. Finance Minister and hope that you will also find some time and go there... (Interruptions)
SHRI SOMNATH CHATTERJEE : He went there.
SHRI MURLI DEORA : He went before. Now, he will realise it. He does not know what is happening there. Unfortunately, the problem is that the Ministry of Finance and the Government of India are still not aware what is happening on the economic sanctions. Nobody knows it. Today, we had a meeting of our Standing Committee on Finance where every Member suggested that the next subject should be the possible effect of economic sanctions on India. So, I hope, Mr. Finance Minister will do that.
Sir, I am quoting one line from the speech of Shri Sinha which he gave last year -- very nice photograph he has with a photogenic face -- as a Leader of the Opposition. Earlier, he was in secular party. Now, the very party which he was calling communal throughout, either is not communal or he has become communal. I do not want to comment on that... (Interruptions)
Sir, I am quoting Shri Sinha. It says:
"The central problem of the Indian economy is unemployment."
It is about last year's Budget. He further says:
"This problem has not even been mentioned in the Budget, much less tackled."
I agree with him as to what he says. But what has he done? He has done nothing. You have forgotten the BJP Agenda. I do not know whether you privately push through. In your National Agenda, it is said that you will give one crore jobs. I do not want to bring the paper and bother my head. Twice, it is written there : Berozgari hatao. "Eradicate unemployment." What has the hon. Finance Minister got here to eradicate unemployment? He has provided nothing to eradicate unemployment. I want to tell him -- it is not his fault -- what has been happening in these two years. There was a cover story in India Today and I have got it with me and I hope you must have read it... (Interruptions)... Shri Somnath Chatterjee, even you and my other Leftist friend, Shri Basu Deb Acharia, see, what is happening on the job front? In the last two years, two lakh people have lost their job. One lakh people have lost their jobs through the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. Although, they got some compensation but they are out of job still. Another one lakh people are out of job through litigation or BIFR or closure of factory or dismissal or some other reasons... (Interruptions)... Shri Somnath Chatterjee, this is the only issue where I am a Leftist or rather more left than you. Otherwise, you know what I am... (Interruptions)... Sir, in Mumbai Siemens, over 2,000 people are retired on Voluntary Retirement Scheme. The work force of Tata Group which was 78,000 people in 1992-93 has come down to 68,760. It has come down by 10,000 people.
In spite of adding more projects, employment is coming down. Nine private airlines are closed down leading to five thousand people losing their jobs. Modiluft, Damania Airlines are among them. People were getting Rs.30,000 salary a month.Now poor people are working for Rs.3000 or Rs.4000 a month also. It is a pittance because there are no jobs available.
Take Coal India in public sector. Shri Acharia, it is for you. They have a plan to fund Rs.600 crore to retire 34,000 people under VRS. I have a copy of it. It is there in the India Today cover story wherein you talked about jobs and you blamed Shri Chidambaram for not bringing anything like unemployment eradication scheme. What are you going to do? You have also not done anything in this Budget. As a matter of fact, your Budget will create more unemployment. I am not happy to say that, you know this very well. My humble request to you is to do something on this front. Even in a capitalist country like America where there is an Exit Policy, Hire and Fire policy..... श्री विजय गोयल (चांदनी चौक): यह सारी करतूत आपकी सरकार की है।
  श्री मुरली देवड़ा : गोयल जी, आप तो ज्यादा दिन तक हैं ही नहीं, ज्यादा दिन तक रहेंगे भी नहीं, तो कहां से पाप होगा।
He is my friend, he is a trader. He cannot speak today. The Mithaiwallahs had gone to his house today and hammered him in the morning. What to do, still he has to support the Budget! यशवंत सिन्हा जी, जब इलैकशन होगा तो आपको मालूम पड़ेगा कि आपकी   कया हालत होगी। दिल्ली के मिठाई वाले आए, मैंने आपको बताया।
I gave him the names and asked him to please do something for these Mithaiwallahs. Please do not annoy the people who are selling sweets; otherwise you will get into trouble.
Even in USA there are social security systems for those who lose their productive jobs. I have to make one suggestion on this. I have a note on this, I will send it to you. My suggestion is to start many Industrial Training Institutes, in every small block of India. There are 700 blocks in the country. You can train 500 people in each block. They call it `training in skills'. They give training in carpentry, masonry, tailoring, blacksmithery, electricals, motor-mechanism; in the cities in computers. I would like to tell you that Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan has started this kind of computer training programme. I invite Shri Sarpotdar to come and see this once in Mumbai. The Microsoft is setting up one in Hyderabad also. Mr. Bill Gates met your Chief Minister. He has funded this organisation. I am the Vice-Chairman of this organisation. I spoke to him about Calcutta. Those who were not getting jobs of Rs.1700-1800 a month have started getting Rs.4500 or more after getting trained in computers. This scheme is good especially in urban areas. So, please keep this idea of skill creation in urban areas by having ITIs in each of the 700 blocks in our country. This will help a long way.
I must congratulate the Government on repealing the Urban Land Ceiling Act. You live in Calcutta, you do not know. I live in Mumbai, I know what the builders, the sharks are doing. They have created an artificial scarcity of land in our urban metropolis.
  श्री मोहन सिंह (देवरिया): ऐसा भाषण देकर आपने खराब कर दिया। श्री मुरली देवड़ा : मैंने सच्ची बात बोली है। आपको पता नहीं है मैं आपको बताऊंगा।
In 1976, this Act came. Not one per cent of the land has been acquired in Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta and Chennai up-till now. एक परसैंट भी नहीं लिया।
  श्री सोमनाथ चटर्जी : इसको छोड़ो, इसको बोलने का कया मतलब है।
Where they are right, I will compliment them.
  श्री मोहन सिंह : सब गरीबों को शहर से बाहर कर दिया।
  श्री मुरली देवड़ा : गरीब शहर से बाहर नहीं हो रहे हैं, गरीबों को इससे सस्ते घर मिलेंगे, आप मेरी बात मानिए।
I am of the opinion that even though the Central Government has repealed it - as the Housing Minister has announced it - it is for the States to accept it.
I am told that even the Maharashtra Government has not accepted it. It is very important for the State Governments to accept this law to repeal the Urban Land Ceiling Act.
We agree that a large number of people live in rural areas and are engaged in farming but there are also large numbers of people who live in urban areas. But only once a programme was started for their benefit. It is called `Self-employment for Urban Poor Nehru Rozgar Yojana'. Today, the banks have bungled that programme. The banks are just not giving funds to the people. I would request the hon. Minister to find out what is happening to this programme during his next visit to Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta and Chennai.
In cities like Mumbai, there is an Act called `Public Premises Eviction Act'. I know, during his earlier stint, the hon. Minister helped the city. Eviction is taking place again. The LIC, the GIC and UTI are again throwing poor tenants out of the building. Even though Parliament has passed this Act, this is happening and so I would request the hon. Minister of Finance to please come to the rescue of the poor tenants. I would request him to please give directions to the LIC. They are trying to throw out hundreds of tenants. They must follow the Act prevalent in that area.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, with your kind assistance and help and under your guidance, we had a discussion in this House last week. It was on the farmers committing suicide due to crop failure. There is a full-fledged article published by India Today on this. There are interviews of farmers. Why did they commit suicide? The GIC is engaged in the crop insurance business. Recently, there was a question on the crop insurance scheme also. I humbly request the hon. Minister of Finance, through you, that he must increase the availability of funds with the GIC for this crop insurance scheme. As a matter of fact, - I do not know, whether I would be undiplomatic if I told you about this - the GIC is not interested in this business. What they are suggesting is the creation of a separate Crop Insurance Corporation with the help of the NABARD, the LIC and the GIC and the other insurance companies which will come to India after the Budget is passed. It has been announced that the insurance business will go to the private sector. So, charge the private sector companies. We must protect our farmers at any cost.
Today Rs.1100 crore are being lost on motor vehicle insurance. If a car accident takes place, we get an automatic insurance cover from the GIC. The GIC is losing Rs.1100 crore. If they can lose Rs.1100 crore on this, I am sure, they can provide more funds for our farmers who have helplessly committed suicide because their creditors are harassing them. My only request to the hon. Minister of Finance is to create a new corporation which will help in giving our farmers more funds and which will save them.
The hon. Minister has announced that in the insurance sector we will have private participation. What does he mean by hundred per cent `Indian owned companies'? If the HDFC started banks or insurance companies, they themselves will have between five and forty per cent of foreign holding. If the hon. Minister will see the Malhotra Committee Report on Insurance Sector Reforms - it was set up by Dr. Manmohan Singh - he will find that it says that privatisation of insurance business should take place with minor participation of foreign insurance companies.
Why am I pleading for foreign insurance companies? It is because they can help so much technologically and also because they can invest a lot. I would like to tell one thing to my friends sitting here. Today, in India the foreign insurance companies are not operating on their own. I am sure, you remember the famous or infamous case of Kanishka Aircraft 747, the jumbo jet of Air India which plunged into the Atlantic Ocean, Shri Khurana. Who financed them? American Insurance companies financed them. The GIC covered only a small amount. The GIC paid only Rs.60 lakh. Ninety seven per cent of the business of the GIC or the other Indian insurance companies is through reinsurance. The insurance is done by the foreign companies. So, the foreign companies are already there in the insurance sector whether you like it or not. One must see how much corruption is there in the insurance companies. दो लाख लोगों का मोर्चा, उससे यह चलने वाला नहीं है।
SHRI YASHWANT SINHA: I see that the enthusiastic applause of the Left friends have now stopped.
  श्री मोहन सिंह : नहीं, इनकी पार्टी ने भी विरोध किया था ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ)¤ÉÒ.VÉä.{ÉÒ. xÉä ¦ÉÒ Ê´É®úÉävÉ ÊEòªÉÉ lÉÉ* ªÉä nùÉäxÉÉäÆ iÉ®ú¡ò ºÉä ½þèÆ* ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ)+{ÉxÉÒ {ÉÉ]õÒÇ EòÒ +Éä®ú ºÉä {ÉÉºÉ Eò®úÉ nùäÆ, Ê¡ò®ú nùäJÉÉ VÉÉBMÉÉ* ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) SHRI MURLI DEORA : Even my own party may not accept some of the suggestions that I am making. Some of the suggestions are my own.
It is the question concerning the country's economy. ... (Interruptions) I would request the hon. Minister of Finance to reconsider the decision. I know that we need technology and finance in the insurance sector. But what is needed more is transparency. It is better if the insurance companies in India have on their own even forty per cent of the shareholding instead of surreptitiously reinsuring the business. It is because majority of the business come through reinsurance. It will help in creating more jobs. Please reconsider the decision.
I would like to say a few words on oil. One-third of India's total import bill is for oil and petro chemicals. Today we are spending US $ 10 billions on the import of oil and petroleum products. Fortunately, now it has come down because of the decline in oil prices. It has come down by four or five dollars. There is a need to reactivise the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP). It was announced by the Government of India but it has not been streamlined. Nothing has been done on this front. I would request you to streamline the NELP. People should know what has happened to that policy. The bidders are not given the documents and they are not given the details about the oil field. ONGC and Oil India are given preference over them. The Income-tax on ONGC is less whereas for other companies it is more. There is an oil field in Bombay High -- Neelam. Due to technological problem, production of oil in that oil field has come down by two-third.
I understand that the bids of several big companies like Caltex are pending. The Government should take a decision to see that these bids are announced correctly. For deep water drilling where lot of hydro carbon is available, geophysical and geological survey technologies are not available in India. We must take the help of these multi-national foreign companies. I am told that due to non-availability of berth in the ports, especially in Mumbai port, the country is losing US $ 150 millions in demurrages. They can create barges and small ports near Gujarat or Maharashtra or somewhere else. Why should we lose so much on this? I am sure the hon. Minister will take care of this aspect.
Now, I would come to power sector. I was the convenor of the Sub-Committee of the Standing Committee on Energy. We were examining the fast track power projects.
There are eight fast track power projects cleared by the Government of India five years back. Six of them are still languishing and only two are on. There is no track of six fast track power projects which you call fast track for five years! The biggest problem is - I must tell you, Mr. Minister - the finalisation of FSA, Fuel Supply Agreement. The Coal India says that they do not have coal or it says that they have coal but it does not have railway wagons. When it has railway wagons, it says that it has to be cleared by the Environment Ministry. Whoever becomes the Environment Minister he has different standards of environment and pollution control about which we all know. So, there is a need to streamline this. There is a need to have an effective intra-Ministerial coordination in this respect. The Environment Ministry should expeditiously clear the projects. They are pending for so many years. Setting up of a committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary himself would help a lot.
When Shri I. K. Gujral became the Prime Minister, a Committee was set up which was known as Justice Bhagwati Committee. Nobody did anything to see what happened to the past reports of the Committee. We keep on setting up committees to expedite power projects. My friends sitting here know what has happened in Delhi. We had virtual power riots in Delhi. We must prevent them. I am sure the hon. Minister is worried about the power supply situation. This is the situation on the generation side.
If you see the distribution side, you will find that it is very alarming. We do not talk about distribution at all. There are so many thefts and bungling taking place on the distribution side. I do not know why the Government is not thinking in terms of bringing a scheme to privatise distribution -- not only to privatise generation, but also to privatise distribution.
The State Electricity Boards have to pay over Rs.5,000 crore to NTPC or to BHEL which supply them the power and the equipments. I compliment the hon. Minister for making a scheme. I think, since enough funds are not provided for the State Electricity Boards, the respective State Governments must be told that it is their responsibility and the new scheme which I believe the hon. Minister wants to propose - opening a letter of credit would come up to see that those companies which supply them the equipment and power are not starved of their legitimate funds.
Finally, I would request the Finance Minister to withdraw the hike in urea price. I understand that my friend sitting here who is a farmer himself knows it well. I do not think I have seen a farm even! The farmers are not buying urea even now because they are waiting for further reduction. They know how strong they are and how vulnerable we, the politicians, are. So, instead of making it a prestige issue, better to withdraw it and better to announce it as he has made earlier. ... (Interruptions) I know how poor some of the farmers like you are! Some farmers are good like you and we are happy. We are proud of you, Sir. I am not saying all the farmers are very poor.
MODVAT refunds should be brought back to 100 per cent. The system which he has made is not a good system. We are not sending a correct message to people who are honest tax payers. If they have paid something, they must get the refund fully and not 90 per cent, which is not good. CVD charge of eight per cent should be brought down. I am not saying that it should be totally eliminated. I am not against the protection to the indigenous industry. But if you give only protection to the Indian industry then what will happen? Unfortunately, my friend Shri Indrajit Gupta is not here. Seven years back, in my speech on Budget discussion, I said in this House, sitting in that side, that one day IDPL is going to close. Unfortunately - I am sad to say that - IDPL is being closed today because we did not give them the technological support; they were buying truncated knowhow from the USSR. I am trying to tell you that if one does not build up PSUs, if one does not give them the correct technology about which you have been many times telling - the companies, both private and public, will not last.
Mr. Minister, you do not know about the Bombay Club. I know them very well which are aware.
20.00 hrs. I must tell you about the Mumbai Club. There were two issues of scooters in eleven years. What have they done in these eleven years? They have not improved the quality or the efficiency of the scooter. They have not reduced the fuel efficiency; they have not reduced the pollution emitting out of the scooter. Why? It was because there was protection. The delivery of scooters from Bajaj India Limited and Lohia Machines Limited took six years. If you want to buy a scooter, you had to book six years in advance. We all know what it was. That much protection is not good. Our Indian company should be protected from unhealthy competition. But they should also be allowed to compete. If they do not compete, they will never be able to improve their quality and price after sales service.
MR. SPEAKER: You have already taken more than an hour.
SHRI MURLI DEORA (MUMBAI SOUTH): Sir, I will really take only two-and-a-half minutes...(interruptions)...The hon. Minister is very fond of his first initial, that is, `S' which stands for Sinha. I do not blame him. There is nothing wrong in that....(interruptions)... He said that letter three times, that is, Saral, Samadhan and Samman. They are good words. But think yourself today evening as to whether you have really provided a saral Budget or not. Do you know what a confusion you have created about MODVAT and all these things? Do you know that the mithaiwallahs are up in arms in Bombay who are here in Delhi now. हमें मिठाई वालों की जरूरत पड़ती है कयोंकि वे भी हमारे वोटर हैं।
They are all my voters.
Regarding food processing, please make it more simpler. I know that the Finance Minister has brought one page form for filing IT. I read that report that the very Income Tax Department is against this form because the information asked from the assessee is too little. They need more information. Please clarify (interruptions)...So, Sir, I am sure that saral will not be really saral; in Samadhan, there will be really No Samadhan and about Samman, you will be getting Samman when these things are settled. Otherwise, what will happen? We have to caution the people. We should tell the people to be savdhan from you. `From you' means from the Government and not from you personally. And this country cannot be allowed to flourish at the cost of satyanash of others. This country has to prosper and this country has to grow up and up. I would request you, Mr. Finance Minister, to please see that the harassment which is caused by some unintentional measures by you should be redeemed.
"> श्री सत्य पाल जैन (चंडीगढ़): अध्यक्ष महोदय, माननीय वित्त मंत्री श्री सिन्हा जी ने इस वर्ष का जो बजट प्रस्तुत किया है, मैं उसका समर्थन करने के लिए खड़ा हुआ हूं। इस सरकार ने १९ मार्च १९९८ को पद भार ग्रहण किया था। उस समय जो आर्िथक स्िथति थी, वह इतना निराशाजनक थी जिस का जिक़ काफी हद तक मुरली देवरा साहब ने भी किया और बाकी बोलने वाले भी इसका जिक़ करने वाले होंगे।
  पिछले पचास वषर्ों में इस देश में अधिकांशत: कांग्रेस पार्टी का राज रहा और कांग्रेस पार्टी के अन्दर भी अगर मैं कहूं कि लगभग एक परिवार का राज रहा तो कोई गलती नहीं होगी। १९५६ में कांग्रेस ने समाजवादी व्यवस्था का नारा दिया। १९५६ में पंडित जवाहर लाल नेहरू जी के नेत्ृात्व में समाजवादी व्यवस्था से चुनी कांग्रेस १९६९ में गरीबी हटाओ के नारे से होती हुई १९८४ में स्वर्गीय राजीव गांधी की वैश्वीकरण की नीति से निकल कर ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ)¨ÉèÆ ¤ÉVÉ]õ {É®ú ½þÒ ¤ÉÉä±É ®ú½þÉ ½þÚÆ* ¨ÉèÆ +É{ÉEòä xÉäiÉÉ+ÉäÆ EòÉ ½þÒ ÊVÉFò Eò®ú ®ú½þÉ ½þÚÆ* ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ)   अगर आपको बजट की समझ नहीं है तो मैं समझा नहीं सकता हूं।
  एक माननीय सदस्य : मुझे पूरी समझ है।
  श्री सत्य पाल जैन : कोशिश करिए, और हो जाएगी।
  वह स्वर्गीय राजीव गांधी जी की वैश्वीकरण की नीति से निकलते हुए अंत में सरदार मनमोहन सिंह जी की उदारीकरण की नीति की गोद में बैठ गई। यह परस्पर विरोधी नीतियां थीं। उसी का परिणाम है कि आज देश की आर्िथक स्िथति अस्तव्यस्त होकर रह गई। १९९७-९८ से पहले १९९६ में देश में एक प्रयोग हुआ। लोगों ने कांग्रेस पार्टी को हराया। वामपंथी विचारधारा वाले लोग और कांग्रेस के लोग जिन का विचारधारा के मामले में आपस में कोई मेल-जोल नहीं था, जो एक दूसरे का विरोध करते थे, उन्होंने १९९६ से १९९८ तक लगभग दो साल के दौर के अन्दर मिलकर एक प्रयास किया। उन्होंने कॉमन मनिमम प्रोग्राम के तहत देश को चलाने की कोशिश की। उसका परिणाम यह निकला कि समग्र आर्िथक विकास कम होकर ५ परसैंट रह गया। यह भारत सरकार की फीगर्स हैं। इस दौर में कृषि विकास का नकारात्मक विकास हुआ। १९९६-९७ में खाद्यान्न का उत्पादन १९९ मलियन टन था जो १९९७-९८ में कम होकर १९४ मलियन टन रह गया। यह उन लोगों की नीतियों का परिणाम था जो किसानों के विकास की बात करते थे। मैं इस विषय को थोड़ी देर बाद डील करूंगा।
20.08 hrs (Shri Basu Deb Acharia in the Chair)   अध्यक्ष महोदय, औद्योगिक उत्पादन मंदी के कारण मात्र ४.२ परसैंट रह गया था। वह और अधिक कमजोर होने लगा था। राजकोष घाटे की स्िथति निरन्तर बिगड़ती गई और यह सकल घरेलू उत्पाद का ७.१ परसैंट हो गया था। उस समय आधारभूत बुनियादी सुविधाओं की कठिनाई निरन्तर बढ़ रही थी और देश की अर्थव्यवस्था बहुत बुरी हालत में थी। ५० साल की नीतियों के बाद यह हमें बताना चाहते हैं कि स्वदेशी कया है और विदेशी कया है? पीने का पानी भी गांव के लोगों को यह सरकार दे नहीं पाई थी। एक नहीं, लाखों गांव हिन्दुस्तान में ऐसे हैं जहां लोग ५-६ किलोमीटर दूर पीने का पानी लेने के लिए जाते हैं। बिजली की हालत आज भी खराब है। आपको आज भी हजारों गांव ऐसे मिलेगें जहां लोगों को बिजली मिल नहीं पाई। हमें ऐसी आर्िथक स्िथति विरासत में मिली।
  हमने जो पोखरण परीक्षण किया, उसके कारण विदेशी खतरे भी बढे। लोगों को आशंका थी कि बहुत सख्त बजट आएगा। लोगों को लग रहा था कि पता नहीं कितने टैकस लगेंगे। देश की जनता मानसिक रूप से इस बात के लिए तैयार हो गई थी कि इस बजट से भारी टैकस लगेंगे। वे टैकस देने के लिए तैयार भी थे। मैं देश के प्रधान मंत्री और वित्त मंत्री को बधाई देना चाहता हूं कि वे इन सारी परस्िथतियों से विचलित नहीं हुए। उन्होंने ऐसा बजट प्रस्तुत किया है जिस के कारण जो लोग यह कह रहे थे, बहुत बड़े टैकस लगेंगे, उनको निराशा हुई। वित्त मंत्री ने उनकी आशंकाएं दूर की और ऐसा बजट पेश किया है जिस का आम जनता ने स्वागत किया है। इसका मजदूरों, किसानों, महिलाओं और आम कर्मचारियों ने स्वागत किया है। इसका समाज के सभी वगर्ों ने स्वागत किया है।
  महोदय, परमाणु परीक्षण के बाद बहुत सारे खतरे हमारे सामने आए थे लेकिन वित्त मंत्री और प्रधान मंत्री जी ने जो बजट प्रस्तुत किया है, उससे लगता है कि उन्होंने बहुत गम्भीरता से बजट प्रस्तुत किया है। यह हल्के-फुल्के ढंग से लाया गया बजट नहीं है। यह घबराहट से लाया गया बजट नहीं है। यह बजट सारी स्िथतियों का आकलन करके और आने वाले खतरे का एहसास करने के बाद पेश किया गया है।
  नेशनल एजेंडा आफ गवर्नैन्स के आने के बाद लगातार इस सरकार ने कहा कि भारत का निर्माण भारतीयों द्वारा किया जाएगा। विदेशी धमकियां आने के बाद जिसे खतरे का हमें सामना करना पड़ा, उसके बावजूद हमारे वित्त मंत्री और प्रधान मंत्री ने किसी को धमकियां नहीं दी। उस खतरे को महसूस करते हुए एन.आर.आईज. का आत्मसम्मान जगाने का प्रयास किया गया। उनके अन्दर देशभकित की भावना और ज्यादा प्रबल करने की कोशिश की गई, जिस का परिणाम यह निकला है कि हमारे एन.आर.आईज. चाहे वे दुनिया के किसी कोने में बैठे हैं, वे सारे भारत को यह संदेश दे रहे हैं कि किसी बात की चिंता मत करिए, अगर सैंकशन्स आती हैं तो भारत के बाहर बैठा एन.आर.आई. भारत के लिए सब कुछ कुर्बान करने के लिए तैयार है। यह संदेश इस बजट ने हम को दिया है।
  प्रवासी भारतीयों को एक अच्छा पैकेज दिया गया है जिस के कारण इनकी इनवैस्टमैंट बढ़ेगी। उनका अपने देश के प्रति पूंजी लगाने का लगाव बढ़ेगा। विदेशी पासपोर्ट रखने वाले भारतीय मूल के जो व्यकित हैं, उनको विशेष पी.आई.ओ. कार्ड प्राप्त हुए हैं। उनके लिए वीजा मुकत भारत आने का प्रावधान किया गया है, मैं ऐसा महसूस करता हूं कि यह एक बहुत अच्छा कदम है। इसका स्वागत किया जाना चाहिए। इसके अलावा भारतीय कम्पनियों में अनिवासी भारतीयों की सीमा को एक परसैंट से बढ़ा कर पांच परसैंट किया गया है। किसी कम्पनी में कुल एन.आर.आई. की संबंधित सीमा को पांच परसैंट से बढ़ा कर दस परसैंट किया गया है। ये ऐसे कदम हैं जिन का स्वागत किया जाना चाहिए।
  बजट में सभी वगर्ों को राहत देने की कोशिश की गई है। समाज का शायद ही कोई ऐसा वर्ग होगा जिस को वित्त मंत्री ने राहत देने का प्रयास न किया हो। हमारा देश ऐसा देश है जहां मैन पावर ज्यादा है और रिसोर्िसज कम हैं। इसलिए जहां तक बड़ी इंडस्ट्रीज का ताल्लुक है, यह ठीक है कि बड़ी इंडस्ट्रीज उत्पादन ज्यादा करती है।
  वे उत्पादन भले ही ज्यादा करती हों, लेकिन उनसे रोजगार कम लोगों को मिल पाता है। दूसरी तरफ जो स्माल स्केल उद्योग हैं, वे भले ही उत्पापदन कम करती हों, लेकिन रोजगार ज्यादा लोगों को देती हैं। इस बजट में जो स्माल स्केल उद्योग हैं, उनके लिए बहुत अच्छी व्यवस्था की गई है। मैं समझता हूं कि इसके लिए हमारे वित्त मंत्री जी बधाई के पात्र हैं। लघु उद्योगों के लोगों ने राहत की सांस ली है, कयोंकि लम्बे अर्से से उन लोगों को किसी किस्म की रियायत नहीं दी जा रही थी।
  महोदय, उत्पादन शुल्क के लिए छूट सीमा ३० लाख रुपए से बढ़ाकर ५० लाख की गई है। जिससे बहुत सी यूनिटस को लाभ होगा। ऐसे ही कार्यशील पूंजी, जो वार्िषक कारोबार का २० प्रतिशत है, उसे दो करोड़ से बढ़ाकर चार करोड़ किया गया है। इससे बैंक ऋण प्राप्त करने में अधिक आसानी होगी। लघु उद्योंगों के लिए बैंक ऋण की लागत कम करने के उपाय किए गए हैं। लघु उद्योग ऋण व्यवस्था में SIDBI की भूमिका अधिक होगी। सबसे बड़ी बात यह है कि इन्सपैकटर राज हटाने के लिए उत्पादन शुल्क, प्रशासन तन्त्र में बहुत सारे परिवर्तन किए गए हैं। आज भी स्माल स्केल उद्योग में चाहे वह छोटा दुकानदार है, छोटा ट्रेडर हैं, उनको इन्सपैकटर राज से ही भय था। इस पर मैं यह कहना चाहता हूं कि इससे डायरेकट टैकिसज और बाकी टैकिसज के मामले में उनको इस इंस्पैकटर राज से राहत मिलेगी।
  सभापति महोदय, ग्राम और ग्रामीण विकास की बात बहुत लम्बे अरसे से लोग करते रहैं है। लेकिन ग्रामों के विकास की ओर जितना ध्यान दिया गया जब वह डाटा हमारे सामने आता है उससे हमें स्िथति स्पष्ट होती है। स्वयं स्वर्गीय राजीव गांधी जी ने राजस्थान में यह बात कही थी कि यदि एक रुपया गांव में विकास के लिए भेजा जाता है तो उसमें से केवल १५ पैसे नीचे पहुंचते हैं, ८५ पैसे बीच में कहां चले जाते हैं यह उनको मालूम था, लेकिन वह शायद उस पर बोलना नहीं चाहते थे, उनकी कुछ मजबूरियां रही होंगी। लेकिन विकास की तरफ ध्यान नहीं दिया गया जिसका परिणाम यह हुआ कि गांव के अंदर जो कृषि योग्य भूमि है उस भूमि में से केवल ३७ प्रतिशत भूमि ऐसी है जिसको इंश्योर्ड इर्िरगेशन मिल रही है, बाकी लोगों की हालत यह है कि उनको इर्िरगेशन के साधन उपलब्ध नहीं हैं। अभी आपने किसानों द्वारा आत्महत्या का जिक़ किया। मैं उस विषय पर बाद में आऊंगा। उसका मुख्य कारण यह था कि सिंचाई के लिए पानी देने की व्यवस्था सरकार नहीं कर पाई, जिसके कारण किसानों पर ऋण बढ़ता गया और नौबत आत्महत्या तक पहुंच गयी। मुझे खुशी है कि वित्त मंत्री जी ने किसानों के लिए गांवों के विकास के लिए इस बजट में बहुत सारे कदम उठाए हैं, उसमें से मैं कुछ का जिक़ करना चाहूंगा। कृषि मंत्रालय के योजना आबंटन में ५८ प्रतिशत की व्ृाद्धि हुई है। आज तक जितने बजट आए हैं, ये उनमें रिकार्ड व्ृाद्धि होगी।
  ग्रामीण जल आपूर्ित के लिए १६२७ करोड़ रुपये की आपने व्यवस्था की है जिससे करीब एक लाख परिवार लाभ उठायेंगे। जल संग्रहण विकास कार्यक़म के लिए भी पैसा दिया है, उसमें ३१ प्रतिशत की व्ृाद्धि की गई है। मुझे बताया गया कि यह भी शायद रिकार्ड व्ृाद्धि है। आज तक किसी बजट में इतनी व्ृाद्धि नहीं की गई। इसी प्रकार त्वरित सिंचाई लाभ कार्यक़म के लिए जो प्रोविजन है उसमें ५८ प्रतिशत की व्ृाद्धि की गई है और मुझे बताया गया है कि यह भी एक रिकार्ड व्ृाद्धि है। किसानों के लिए कैश क़ेडिट कार्ड देने की बात शुरू की गई है। मुझे खुशी है हमारे विपक्ष के लोग भी इस बात के पक्ष में थे और एक दिन बहस करते हुए कांग्रेस के कुछ सदस्यों ने इस संबंध में बात कही थी तो श्री यशवंत सिंहा जी ने कहा था कि मेरे बजट का इंतजार कीजिए, मेरा बजट आने के बाद आपको इस संबंध में कोई शिकायत नहीं होगी। यह बहुत खुशी की बात है कि आपने कैश क़ेडिट कार्ड देने की योजना शुरू की है। आज उससे किसानों को राहत मिलेगी, उनको सही दिशा में मदद मिलेगी। वह खाद, बीज आदि ले सकेगा और जो ऋण लेकर आत्महत्या करने की नौबत आती थी उससे बचने में उसे सहायता मिलेगी। वित्त मंत्री जी ने खाली नारों से देश को चलाने की कोशिश नहीं की है, बल्िक एक स्थाई मदद किसानों को देने की कोशिश की है। मैं बताना चाहता हूं कि ऋण से ग्रस्त किसान को ऋण से मुकत करने का प्रयास हमारे वित्त मंत्री जी ने किया है। उसके लिए देश का किसान हमेशा उनका ऋणी रहेगा, आभारी रहेगा, धन्यवादी रहेगा। इसी प्रकार से किसान जो लोन्स नहीं दे पाता था उनके लिए आपने कंसेशंस अनाउंस किये हैं, उसके लिए भी आप बधाई के पात्र हैं।
  सभापति महोदय, आज आवास की समस्या सारे देश की प्रमुख समस्या बनकर रह गई है। आप किसी बड़े कस्बे में चले जाइये, किसी भी बड़े शहर दिल्ली, मुम्बई या कलकत्ता में चले जाइये, मकान की समस्या सबसे बड़ी समस्या के रूप में हमारे सामने आने लगी है। लाखों-करोड़ों लोग ऐसे हैं जिनके पास रहने के लिए मकान नहीं हैं।
  आज आप कर्मचारियों से मकान मिलने की स्िथति के बारे में पूछो तो किसी के दफतर में १९७४ की लिस्ट चल रही है, किसी के यहां १९७६ की लिस्ट चल रही है। हजारों कर्मचारी ऐसे हैं जो रिटायर हो जाते हैं लेकिन उनको सरकारी मकान नहीं मिल पाता है। सभापति महोदय, मैं चंडीगढ़ निर्वाचन क्षेत्र से आता हूं, यह एक छोटा सा केन्द्र शासित प्रदेश है और लोग इसको एक खूबसूरत शहर मानते हैं, यह वास्तव में एक खूबसूरत शहर है इसके बारे में दो राय नहीं हो सकती हैं। लेकिन आप हैरान होंगे कि इस यूनियन टैरिटरी की आबादी कुल साढ़े सात लाख है, लेकिन उनमें से एक लाख लोग ऐसे हैं जिनके पास रहने के लिए मकान नहीं है। वहां ३० स्लम एरियाज हैं जहां वे ६" या ८" की झुग्िगयां बनाकर रहते हैं। इसके अलावा भी और बहुत सारे ऐसे लोग हैं जिनको मकान की सुविधा नहीं मिलती। मुझे खुशी है कि आज इस बजट में सरकार ने आवास के लिए बहुत ज्यादा धन दिया है। मैं अपने वित्त मंत्री जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूं कि आपने २० लाख अतरिकत मकान बनाने का लक्षय रखा है, मैं उसके लिए भगवान से प्रार्थना करूंगा कि यह सफल हो। ताकि देश के अंदर जो मकानों की कमी हो रही है, जिसके कारण आम कर्मचारी, गरीब आदमी, छोटा आदमी कठिनाई के दौर से गुजर रहा है, उनको सहायता मिल सके। इन २० लाख अतरिकत मकानों में से १३ लाख आप ग्रामीण क्षेत्र में बनाने की बात कर रहे हैं बाकी सात लाख मकान शहरी क्षेत्र में बनेंगे। इसके अलावा इंदिरा आवास योजना के लिए १६०० करोड़ रुपये दिये गये हैं। एक लम्बे अरसे से इंदिरा आवास योजना में कोई बहुत अधिक धन नहीं दिया जा रहा था और जो धन दिया भी जा रहा था उसमें मकान नहीं बन पा रहे थे। मुझे याद है कुछ दिन पहले बोलते हुए हमारे सदस्यों ने इस तरफ ध्यान आकर्िषत किया था। अब मैं उम्मीद करता हूं कि इस पैसे से वे हजारों मकान बन सकेंगे जो आम आदमी के काम आ सकेंगे।
  सभापति महोदय, हुडको में ११० करोड़ रुपये निवेश करने आपने व्यवस्था की है। इसके अलावा वित्त मंत्री जी ने अपने बजट में आवास निर्माण के लिए बहुत सारी रियायतें दी हैं। प्रथम पांच वषर्ों के लिए और अगले पांच वषर्ों के लिए ३० प्रतिशत की कर कटौती, मरम्मत आदि पर २० प्रतिशत से बढ़ाकर २५ प्रतिशत की गई है। इसके अतरिकत और भी घोषणाएं आपने इसमें की हैं, मैं उनमें नहीं जाना चाहता, उसमें जाने से बहुत समय लगेगा। मैं समझता हूं कि यह ऐसा क्षेत्र था जिसकी ओर आज तक किसी सरकार ने ध्यान नहीं दिया। हमारे वित्त मंत्री जी और प्रधान मंत्री जी बधाई के पात्र हैं कि जो हमारे नौजवान हैं, विद्यार्थी हैं, वे बेरोजगारी के कारण और शिक्षा में बहुत सारी कमियों के कारण बहुत परेशानी में थे। आज तक किसी ने इस ओर ध्यान नहीं दिया। लेकिन मुझे खुशी है कि हमारी सरकार ने इस ओर ध्यान देते हुए दो-तीन चीजें करने की कोशिश की है।
  सभापति महोदय, रेलवे बजट में आपने देखा होगा पहली बार श्री अटल बिहारी वाजपेयी जी के नेत्ृात्व में सरकार ने देश में उन नौजवानों के लिए मुफत रेल यात्रा की सुविधा प्रदान की है जो इंटरव्यू देने के लिए जाना चाहते हैं। इस बजट में यह भी पहली बार ही हुआ है कि शिक्षा के बजट में ५० प्रतिशत की बढ़ोत्तरी की गई है। १९९७-९८ में ४७१६ करोड़ का प्रावधान था जो १९९८-९९ में बढ़कर ७०४७ करोड़ किया गया है। हमारे गावों में पिछड़े क्षेत्रों के लोग, गरीब परिवारों के लोग अपने बच्चों को पढ़ने के लिए स्कूल में इसलिए नहीं भेज पा रहे थे चूंकि उनको लगता था कि बच्चा अगर किसी चाय की दुकान पर काम करेगा, लड़की किसी के घर के बर्तन मांजने जायेगी तो वे कुछ पैसा कमाकर लायेंगे, जिससे परिवार का गुजारा किया जा सके। मुझे खुशी है कि हमारे वित्ती मंत्री जी ने लड़कियों के लिए मुफत शिक्षा की व्यवस्था की है, उसके लिए वे बधाई के पात्र हैं और आपने इस मद में जो सौ करोड़ रुपये की व्यवस्था की है, मैं आशा करता हूं कि यह रकम धीरे-धीरे और बढ़ेगी और महिलाएं मुफत शिक्षा प्राप्त कर पायेंगी। इसके साथ-साथ युवाओं को राष्ट्र निर्माण में लगाने के लिए राष्ट्रीय पुनर्िनर्माण कोर की स्थापना की आपने घोषणा की है, उसके लिए भी आप बधाई के पात्र हैं। इससे ज्यादा लोगों को लाभ होगा। जितनी पार्िटयों के बजट हैं, जितनी पार्िटयों के मेनिफेस्टो हैं, सब पार्िटयों ने अपने मेनिफेस्टों में कहा था कि हम शिक्षा पर खर्चा बढ़ायेंगे, शिक्षा की ओर अधिक ध्यान देंगे। लेकिन किसी सरकार ने इस ओर गंभीरता से ध्यान नहीं दिया। यह शायद पहली भारतीय जनता पार्टी की सरकार है, श्री अटल बिहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार है जिसने यूथ्स के लिए एजूकेशन, महिलाओं के लिए इतनी सारी व्यवस्था करने की कोशिश की है।
  सभापति महोदय, टैकसेशन में सरलीकरण की मांग बहुत समय से चल रही थी। मुझे खुशी है कि हमारे वित्त मंत्री जी ने इस ओर ध्यान दिया है। आयकर में छूट की सीमा बढ़ाकर ५० हजार की गई है। यह बात सही है कि भारतीय जनता पार्टी ने अपने मेनिफेस्टो में यह कही थी कि इस सीमा को बढ़ाकर एक लाख रूपये किया जायेगा। परंतु मैं अपने मित्रों को विश्वास दिलाना चाहता हूं कि वित्त मंत्री जी का यह पहला बजट है, अभी हमारे चार बजट आने बाकी हैं, जब पांचवा बजट आयेगा तो मुझे पूरा विश्वास है कि इस आयकर की सीमा को ५० हजार से बढ़ाकर एक लाख कर दिया जायेगा। इतना मुझे विश्वास है।
  सभापति महोदय, मैं कहना चाहता हूं कि वह समय बहुत दूर नहीं है। वह समय शीघ्र ही हमारे सामने आएगा। हमारे बहुत सारे सदस्य इस खुशफहमी में हैं कि यह सरकार चली जाएगी। आज जाएगी या कल जाएगी और अगला बजट ये वित्त मंत्री पेश नहीं कर सकेंगे। मैं ऐसा सोचने वालों से निवेदन करना चाहता हूं कि वे थोड़ा धैर्य रखें, सब कुछ आपके सामने आ जाएगा। आज देश की जनता इस सरकार के साथ भावनात्मक रूप से जुड़ चुकी है। आपको परख चुकी है। हमारे कम्युनिस्ट भाई तो कया बोलेंगे कयोंकि आपका जो सबसे बड़ा मकका-मदीना था, जो आपका सबसे बड़ा मसीहा था, रूस जिसके ऊपर आप सारी दुनिया की बात किया करते थे, जिसने स्टेट कंट्रोल की बात कही, जिसने मैटर को, मटीरियलिज्म को और चीजों को ऊपर उठाने की बात की, वह आज टूट कर बिखर चुका है और वहां की सारी व्यवस्था बिलकुल ध्वस्त हो चुकी है। चीन की कैसी स्िथति है वह आप सबको मालूम है। चूंकि आज वह विषय विचार का नहीं है इसलिए मैं उस पर कुछ नहीं कहूंगा। इसलिए आप उसकी बात न करें। जो हिन्दुस्तान की अर्थ व्यवस्था है, वह सबसे अच्छी अर्थ व्यवस्था है और वही दुनिया में आगे स्थाई रहने वाली है और उसी को सारी दुनिया मानेगी।
  सभापति महोदय, जो कर्मचारी भाई हैं उनको इससे लाभ होगा। मैं मानता हूं कि आयकर में थोड़ी कम सिर्फ ५० हजार की छूट दी गई है, लेकिन मुझे विश्वास है कि आगे आने वाले समय में वह और बढ़ेगी। सरल, समाधान और सम्मान जैसी बातों का बजट में समावेश करके आपने आयकर दाताओं की परेशानियों को समझा और हल करने का प्रयास किया है। इसके लिए मैं वित्त मंत्री जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूं। मैं पेशे से वकील हूं। अगर आप वकील भी हैं और आपको आयकर की यदि रिटर्न भरनी है, तो आपको बहुत दिककत आएगी कयोंकि फार्म बहुत काम्पलीकेटेड होता है। यदि आप इन्कम टैकस या सेल्स टैकस के वकील नहीं हैं, तो आपको फार्म भरने में परेशानी होगी। उसके सरलीकरण के लिए जो मंत्री जी ने प्रयास किया है, मैं समझता हूं कि यह बहुत खुशी की बात है। इसका स्वागत किया जाना चाहिए। आयकर में छूट की सीमा आपने बढ़ाई है। इसका भी स्वागत है। एक लाख रुपए के वेतन तक मानक कटौती को बढ़ा कर २५ हजार रुपए कर दिया है और पांच लाख रुपए से अधिक वेतन पाने वालों की मानक कटौती नहीं होगी, यह कदम भी सराहनीय है। फार्म का जो सरलीकरण किया है वह भी स्वागत योग्य कदम है। इसके अलावा जो समाधान शब्द का प्रयोग किया गया है जिसके अंतर्गत बहुत मुकदमेबाजी चलती थी और लगातार डिकेडस तक लोगों के केसेस कोर्ट में पेंडिंग रहते थे, १५-२० साल तक उनके फैसले नहीं होते थे, उनकी संख्या में कमी आएगी। अगर आप इन्कम टैकस और सेल्स टैकस टि्रब्यूनल के डाटा मंगाकर देखें, तो आपको मालूम हो जाएगा कितने सारे केसेस अनेक वषर्ों से चल रहे हैं। मैं महसूस करता हूं कि आपने "समाधान" के माध्यम से इनको हल करने का जो रास्ता निकाला है और जो उच्च न्यायालय में सीधे अपील करने की व्यवस्था की है और ३० प्रतिशत का भुगतान कर के केस निपटाने की जो बात आपने कही है, मैं समझता हूं कि उससे केसेस में काफी कमी आएगी और आपके इस कदम का स्वागत किया जाना चाहिए। आपने करदाता को जो "सम्मान" दिया है उसके लिए भी हिन्दुस्तान के करदाता हमेशा आपके आभारी रहेंगे। सभापति महोदय, रोड डवलपमेंट के बारे में सरकार ने ध्यान दिया है। पेट्रोंल के सबसे ज्यादा दाम बढे, तो कांग्रेस, जनता दल और युनाइटेड फ्रंट की सरकार में बढ़े थे। रसोई गैस के दाम भी उन्हीं सरकारों के समय में सबसे ज्यादा बढ़े थे, लेकिन वह पैसा कहां गया किसी को पता नहीं, उसका सदुपयोग सड़कों के सुधारने में किया जाना चाहिए था, लेकिन वैसा नहीं किया गया। हमारे वित्त मंत्री जी ने और हमारी सरकार ने अगर एक रुपया प्रति लीटर पेट्रोल का दाम बढ़ाया है, तो   यह टैकस सरकार ने सड़कों को सुधारने के लिए, उनकी मरम्मत के लिए, उनके डवलपमेंट पर खर्च करने के लिए देने का निश्चय किया है। इसके लिए सरकार बधाई की पात्र है।
  कोई भी देश तब तक तरककी नहीं कर सकता है जब तक कि उसके देश में अच्छी किस्म की सड़कें न हों। किसी ने एक बार पूछा कि कया अमरीका इसलिए महान है कि उसकी सड़कें अच्छी हैं या इसलिए कि वह एक अमीर देश है, तो जवाब मिला कि अमरीका इसलिए महान है कयोंकि उसकी सड़कें अच्छी हैं। मुझे विश्वास है कि पेट्रोल पर बढ़ाए गए टैकस से प्राप्त होने वाले धन को आप देश की सड़कों के विकास पर लगाएंगे।
  सभापति महोदय, यूरिया के संबंध में जिक़ किया गया है। यह बहुत सेंसटिव इश्यू है और वित्त मंत्री जी ने पचास पैसे प्रति किलो यूरिया के दाम बढ़ाए हैं। सदन के सभी पार्िटयों के सदस्यों ने वित्त मंत्री जी से निवेदन किया है इसलिए वे इस पर पुनर्िवचार कर रहे हैं और इसके संबंध में वे एक नीति लेकर आएंगे। मैं एक बात कहना चाहता हूं कि दलगत राजनीति से उपर उठकर हमें इस पर विचार करना चाहिए। कृषि मंत्री सोम पाल जी उस दिन जवाब दे रहे थे, लेकिन माननीय सदस्यों के शोरगुल में उनकी आवाज खो गई। आज सभी इस बात से चन्ितत हैं कि किसान यूरिया का बहुत अधिक इस्तेमाल करने लगा है जिसके कारण जमीन पर निगेटिव इफैकटस हो रहे हैं। हमें उसके बारे में भी किसानों को जागरुक करना पड़ेगा। मैं इस बात को मानता हूं कि मैं पेशे से कृषक नहीं हूं, लेकिन जो जानकारियां मिल रही हैं और जो साइंटीफिक डाटा आ रहा हऐ उससे यह स्पष्ट हो रहा है कि यूरिया और अन्य केमीकल्स के प्रयोग के कारण जमीन का बहुत नुकसान हो रहा है। उससे सावधान रहने की आवश्यकता है। यहां पर हल्ला सिर्फ इसलिए करना कि इससे किसानों का वोट मिल जाएगा, वह अलग विषय है और इस प्रकार से हल्ला करके हम किसान की कितनी मदद कर पाएंगे, यह भी सोचने का विषय है, लेकिन यूरिया के बढ़ते हुए प्रयोग पर अंकुश लगाना और किसानों को इसके नुकसान के बारे में बताना तथा उन्हें इसके बारे में जागरुक करना भी आवश्यक है। यूरिया के प्रयोग से नाइट्रोजन का नुकसान होता है और प्लांट का सालिड मटीरियल कम आता है कयोंकि नाइट्रोजन पानी में घुलकर ऐसी जगह चला जाता है जहां उसकी आवश्यकता नहीं है।
PROF. A.K. PREMAJAM (BADAGARA): It is all absurd. ... (Interruptions)
SHRI SATYA PAL JAIN : Please do not use the word `absurd'. You should know how to speak in Parliament. `Absurd' is not a parliamentary word. Do not use that word. You should know that. Kindly do not do like this. You have the right to differ with my argument. It is not fair on your part. Anyhow, leave it.
  श्री सत्य पाल जैन : मैं अपनी बात कह रहा हूं। आप मुझसे डिफर कर सकते हैं। आप महसूस कर सकते हैं कि नहीं, किसान जितना चाहे मरजी हो उतना यूरिया डालें, भले ही १५-२० साल में उसकी जमीन बेकार हो जाए या जाखड़ साहब कह सकते हैं कि नहीं, सत्य पाल जी आपकी बात ठीक नहीं है। आप मुझसे डिफर कर सकते हैं, लेकिन ऐसे असंसदीय शब्दों का प्रयोग करना उचित नहीं है। मेरा कहना है कि यूरिया के बारे में गंभीरता से विचार करना चाहिए नहीं, तो किसानों का बहुत नुकसान होगा।
  सभापति महोदय, माननीय वित्त मंत्री महोदय ने टैंट और ट्रक से सर्िवस टैकस वापस लिया है। इसका मैं स्वागत करता हूं। स्पोर्टस गुडस इंडस्ट्रीज के बारे में मैंने वित्त मंत्री जी को एक ज्ञापन दिया था। फिजीकल एकसरसाइज कम होने के कारण लोग घर में घूम फिर नहीं पाते हैं। माडर्नाइजेशन का इफैकट उस पर भी पड़ा है और फिजीकल एकसरसाइज कम हो रही है। उस पर भी १२ प्रतिशत एकसाइज डयूटी लगा दी है। इसका परिणाम यह हो रहा है कि साइकल (एकसरसाइजर) जिस पर घर में एकसरसाइज कर सकते हैं, वह महंगा हो गया है और स्िथति यहां तक बदतर हो गई है कि अपनी इंडस्ट्री में बनाया एकसरसाइजर महंगा पड़ रहा है औप बाहर का सस्ता पड़ रहा है। इसका अपनी स्वदेशी इंडस्ट्री पर एडवर्स इफैकट हो रहा है। मेरा वित्त मंत्री जी से अनुरोध है कि वे इस बारे में विचार करें। जहां स्माल स्केल इंडस्ट्रीज के लिए आपने इतने सारे कंसैशन्स दिए हैं वहां स्पोर्टस गुडस के बारे में भी आप पुन: विचार करें और इस एकसाइज डयूटी को हटाएं। हमने पिझली बार जो प्रावधान हुआ था उसके कलैरफिकेशन के लिए आपसे कहा था और अनुरोध किया था कि उसे ठीक किया जाए। इस बारे में हम लोग वित्त मंत्री जी से मिले भी थे और मांग की थी कि इसको समाप्त कर दिया जाए, लेकिन हुआ उल्टा बजाए उसे कलैरीफाई करने और समाप्त करने के, यह कह दिया गया कि स्पोर्टस गुडस के यो जो सारे इंस्ट्रूमेंटस हैं ये स्पोर्टस गुडस में नहीं आते हैं। मेरा निवेदन है कि इस बारे में वित्त मंत्री जी पुन: विचार करें।
  सभापति महोदय, मैं पापुलेशन कंट्रोल के बारे में जरूर कहना चाहता हूं। सरकार चाहे ए की हो, बी की हो या सी की हो, चाहे किसी भी पार्टी की हो और चाहे आप कितनी ही व्यवस्थाएं करते जाइए, बजट में चाहे कितना ही प्रावधान करते जाइए, जब तक हम पापुलेशन कंट्रोल नहीं करेंगे, जब तक बढ़ती हुई जनसंख्या पर नियंत्रण नहीं करेंगे, तब तक हमारी सारी की सारी व्यवस्थाएं और प्रावधान बेकार है। ये सारे प्रयास धरे के धरे रह जाएंगे। बिना जनसंख्या व्ृाद्धि पर नियंत्रण के इस समस्या का समाधान निकलने वाला नहीं है। मैं समझता हूं कि इस समस्या से निपटने के लिए एक राष्ट्रीय नीति बने और सब पार्िटयों के लोग मिलकर कोई समाधान निकालें। कई बार महारे मित्र बोलते हैं कि १९७६ में जनसंख्या नियंत्रण का प्रयास किया गया था और उसमें उन्हें सफलता नहीं मिली तथा राजनीतिक नुकसान हुआ। उसके बाद किसी ने हिम्मत नहीं की। मैं समझता हूं कि अच्छा प्रोग्राम भी यदि ठीक ढंग से लागू न किया जाए, तो कई बार सारे लाष्ट्र को उसकी कीमत अदा करनी पड़ती है। आइए, हम सब उस बात से ऊपर उठकर विचार करें और एक ऐसी नीति बनाएं जिससे पापुलेशन कंट्रोल के बारे में स्थायी कदम उठ सकें।
  सभापति महोदय, यूनियन टैरीटरीज आज सीधे केन्द्र के अधीन आती हैं। हिन्दुस्तान में छ: यूनियन टैरीटरीज हैं, जो होम मनिस्ट्री में आती हैं। मैं चंडीगढ़ यूनियन से चुनकर आया हूं। उनका बजट भी इसी बजट के साथ बनता और पास होता है। जो प्रदेश सरकारें हैं वहां का बजट वे बनाती हैं और बजट के समय प्रदेशों के मुख्य मंत्री यहां आते हैं, बात करते हैं, लेकिन यूनियन टैरीटरीज के बजट में जो चुने हुए प्रतनधि हैं, उनकी किसी किस्म की कोई इन्वाल्वमेंट नहीं है। उनकी कोई भागीदारी नहीं है। मैं मांग करता हूं कि आगे के लिए यूनियन टैरीटरीज से आने वाले सांसदों से विचार-विमर्श किया जाना चाहिए। उनका कया मत है वह लिया जाना चाहिए। ताकि जो चुने हुए लोग हैं उनकी भागीदारी हो सके और जो लोकतंत्रीय पद्धति है उसे मजबूत किया जा सके। अत: मैं माननीय यशवन्त सिन्हा जी से विनती करना चाहता हूं कि वहां हाउसिंग के लिए, रीहैबीलिटेशन के लिए ज्यादा प्रावधान करें और जो वहां रेहड़ी और थड़ी वाले लोग हैं उनको पकके बूथ बनाकर दिए जाएं। वहां रहने वाले कर्मचारियों को आवास के लिए और अधिक धन दें और आर्िथक क्षेत्र में अधिक व्यवस्था करें ताकि हम विकास कर सकें।
  सभापति महोदय, हमारे माननीय सदस्य श्री मुरली देवड़ा जी ने कुछ प्रैस कटिंग्स पढ़ने के बाद कहा कि देश के प्रमुख लोगों ओर विदेशियों ने इस बजट को देश के हित में नहीं बताया है। मैं आपका अधिक समय न लेते हुए मैं भी आपका ध्यान कुछ लोगों के कमेंटस की ओर दिलाना चाहूंगा और ये कमेंटस ऐसे लोगों द्वारा दिए गए हैं जिनके बारे में कह सकते हैं कि वे भा.ज.पा. के साथ सम्बद्ध नहीं हैं। जैसे आब्जरवर समाचार पत्र है। उसने वी.आर. पंचमुखी, डायरैकटर रिसर्च एंड इन्फर्मेशन सिस्टम्स हैं, उनकी रिएकशन अपने दैनिक समाचार पत्र दिनांक २-६-९८ में दी। मैं उसे यहां पढ़ना चाहूंगा।
Dr. V.R. Panchmukhi, Director, Research and Information Systems called Shri Yashwant Sinha's maiden Budget an innovative Budget which was not in the usual format of globalisation.
"...It is rather a nationalistic Budget and what the BJP had promised." Dr. Panchmukhi pointed out.... (Interruptions) सभापति जी, ऐसे ही जो सही बात करेगा, वह आर.एस.एस. का लगेगा और जो लॉजिकल बात करेगा, वह आपको आर.एस.एस. का लगेगा। ऐसे ही एस.वेंकटरामन जो रिजर्व बैंक के गवर्नर रहे हैं, कलकत्ता के टेलीग्राफ में उनका जो स्टेटमैंट छपा, आर्िटकल छपा वह सारा आर्िटकल मैं नहीं पढ़ना चाहता लेकिन उसके एक पैराग्राफ की तरफ आपका ध्यान दिलाना चाहता हूं:-
"The Budget is the right mix of emphasis on agricultural infrastructure and tax reforms, to mention a few of the important features. No one can differ from the Finance Minister's approach that the disquieting trends in the Indian economy in the recent past have to be reversed. He has rightly mentioned the need to strengthen agriculture by making farmers' assets to credit easier. The emphasis in the Budget on housing for rural area is particularly noteworthy. One hopes, the Finance Minister's intentions will be translated into reality."
  आगे चलकर लिखते हैं:-
"Yashwant Sinha has produced a bold and responsible Budget, given the difficult circumstances of competitive populism and the pressure of coalition politics. The East Asian financial crisis has imposed severe restrictions on the Finance Ministers of most countries. International confidence is a tender plant. Above all, in the post-sanctioned atmosphere the Finance Minister has to keep in mind the need for private flow. Thus, external balance, investor confidence and domestic pressure have moulded Sinha's Budget. It is remarkable that Sinha has not yielded to the temptation to break the continuity of policy. The most significant and defining feature of the Budget is that Sinha has, as a statesman, recognised the advantage to the nation of maintaining the continuity of reforms."
  इसके साथ हिन्दी के प्रमुख अखबार राष्ट्रीय सहारा का भी मैं एक ही पैराग्राफ पढ़ रहा हूं, बाकी मैं और नहीं पढ़ना चाहता। उन्होंने अपने बजट भाषण में लिखा है कि एक साहसिक बजट है। मैं एक पैरा पढ़ना चाहता हूं। इस अखबार का आर.एस.एस. से कोई ताल्लुक है और न बी.जे.पी. से कोई ताल्लुक है। वह लिखते हैं:-
  " ेन्द्रीय वित्त मंत्री श्री यशवंत सिन्हा द्वारा १९९८-९९ के लिए संसद त्में पेश बजट के बारे में कोई भी आकलन प्रस्तुत करने से पहले यह कहना उचित होगा कि यह साहसिक बजट है। प्राथमिकता और उद्देश्य दोनों ही दृष्िट से यह बजट पूर्ववर्ती सभी सरकारों से भिन्न है। बजट देखकर कोई भी कह सकता है कि इसमें देश को एक नयी दिशा देने का प्रयास किया गया है। शायद यह पहला मौका है जब देश की जमीनी हकीकत के मद्देनजर बजट तैयार किया गया है। यही कारण है कि कृषि, ग्रामीण, विकास, शिक्षा, स्वास्थ्य, रोजगार एवं कल्याण क्षेत्र पर विशेष जोर दिया गया है। कृषि पर बजटरी आबंटन में ५० प्रतिशत की व्ृाद्धि कर सरकार ने यह साबित कर दिया है कि उसे देश की बेहतर जनता की चिन्ता है। आजादी के ५० वषर्ों बाद भी देश की ७० प्रतिशत आबादी किसी न किसी रूप से कृषि कायर्ों में जुड़ी हुई है और यही उसकी अजीविका का मुख्य साधन भी है।" सभापति जी, अच्छा होता यदि मुरली देवरा जी ने जहां बाकी चीजें पढ़ी हैं, ये कमेंटस भी उन्होंने पढ़े होते तो शायद उनको बहुत कलैरिटी होती। मैं कई बार सोचता हूं कि जो आलोचना करते हैं उसका कारण कया है? जिन्होंने आलोचना करनी है उनको कोई न कोई रास्ता निकालना ही होता है। अयोध्या के बारे में दो दिन से सदन में हंगामा हो रहा है। जब हमारे राष्ट्रीय एजेंडे में अयोध्या का जिक़ नहीं आया तो यही हमारे सांसद भाई खड़े होकर कह रहे थे कि आपने राम को छोड़ दिया, आपने अयोध्या को छोड़ दिया। आज जब अखबारों में खबरें आई हैं कि शायद राम मंदिर के निर्माण के लिए कुछ लोग कहीं तैयारी कर रहे हैं, कर रहे हैं या नहीं कर रहे हैं, मुझे मालूम नहीं है। आज यही लोग शोर मचा रहे हैं कि देखिये आप राम मंदिर का निर्माण करने लगे हैं। अगर आप उस आईटम को छोड़ देते हैं तो आपने कयों छोड़ा और अगर आप उसको शामिल कर रहे हैं तो आपने कयों शामिल किया, दोनों स्िथतियों के अंदर जिन्होंने निंदा करनी है, उनसे अगर हम यह उम्मीद करें कि वह बजट की पोजीटिव साईड को एप्रीशिएट कर पायेंगे तो उनके लिए यह संभव नहीं है। सभापति जी, यह जो देश का बजट है, यह गरीब आदमी का बजट है। यह साधारण आदमी का बजट है। यह कर्मचारी का बजट है। यह देश के आत्मसम्मान का बजट है। यह आत्मसुरक्षा का बजट है। यह विकास का बजट है। यह देश को आत्मनिर्भर बनाने का बजट है। एक नये भारत के निर्माण का बजट है और २१वीं शताब्दी में भारत को लेकर जाने का बजट है। मैं इसका स्वागत करता हूं, समर्थन करता हूं और सदन से इसके पास करने की आशा करता हूं। सभापति महोदय, इन सारे हालात से, जिस प्रकार के हालात से हम गुजरे हैं और जिस तरह का खतरा आज हमारे सामने है, मैं एक बात कहकर आपनी बात समाप्त करना चाहता हूं। भले ही कुछ मुट्ठी भर लोग इस संसद में, संसद के बाहर पोखरण कांड को लेकर हमारी निंदा करें, देश के अंदर ऐसा माहौल पैदा करने की कोशिश करें कि शायद हमारे पास कुछ नहीं है। बड़े दुर्भाग्य की बात थी कि इस संसद में खड़े होकर पूर्व रक्षा मंत्री कहें कि हमारे पास पनडुब्िबयां कम हैं। हमारे पास यह कम हैं, हमारे वह कम हैं। मुझे खुशी है कि वित्त मंत्री जी ने उसकी ओर पूरा ध्यान दिया है। सुरक्षा बजट के अंदर व्ृाद्धि की है। लेकिन इससे देश का जन-मानस घबराने वाला नहीं है। इस देश के लोग आत्मसम्मान से जीना चाहते हैं। इस देश के लोग यह नहीं चाहते कि हिन्दुस्तान का वित्त मंत्री सारी दुनिया में कटोरा उठाकर भीख मांगता घूमे। यह देश की जनता नहीं चाहती है और जो भी स्िथति हमारे सामने आयेगी, देश उसका मुकाबला करेगा। भूखा रहकर भी यह देश अपने आत्मसम्मान के साथ समझौता नहीं कर सकता है। इसलिए हमारे प्रधान मंत्री श्री अटल बिहारी वाजपेयी जी की एक कविता की दो पंकितयां कहकर मैं अपनी बात समाप्त करूंगा।
  "दांव पर सब कुछ लगा है, रुक नहीं सकते, टूट सकते हैं मगर हम झुक नहीं सकते"।
"ऊ श्री मोहन सिंह (देवरिया): सभापति जी, माननीय वित्त मंत्री जी ने अपने बजट भाषण प्रस्तुत करने का समापन हिन्दी के महान प्रगतिशील कवि श्री रामधारी सिंह दिनकर की कविता से किया था और आज भाई जैन जी ने काव्यात्मक शैली में उनके बजट भाषण और बजट प्रस्तुतीकरण का उसी तरह समर्थन किया। लेकिन बजट भाषण के दौरान जो कविता सदन में पढ़ी गयी, उस कविता को कवि ने किस संदर्भ में, किस व्यकित के लिए लिखा था, इस बात को श्री यशवन्त सिन्हा जी अच्छी तरह से जानते होंगे। भारत का एक महान स्वतंत्रता संग्राम सेनानी जब लाल टोपी पहनकर इस देश के नौजवानों को संगठित कर समाजवाद लाने का संघर्ष कर रहा था, तो उसके अभिनन्दन के लिए दिनकर जी ने यह कविता लिखी थी। मुझे अफसोस है कि कविता तो उस महान समाजवादी के बारे में, महान सवर्ोदयवादी के बारे में पढ़ी गयी लेकिन जो बजट रखा गया, उसमें न तो उस महान सेनानी का जिसका सारा इतिहास, सारा आकाश दिनकर जी ने समर्िपत किया था, का समाजवाद इसमें है और न उसका सवर्ोदयवाद इसमें है। मुझे इस बात का अफसोस है कि अन्त्योदयवाद हो ही नहीं सकता। इस टिप्पणी के साथ मैं इस बात को शुरू करना चाहता हूं।
  जब इस सदन में वित्त मंत्री जी ने अनुपूरक अनुदानों की मांग के ऊपर अपनी पहली बात कही थी तो उस समय जो पिछला बजट पेश हुआ था, उसमें जो स्वप्न देखा गया था, वह सारा स्वप्न किस तरह धराशायी हुआ, उस पर उन्होंने अपनी थोड़ी सी टिप्पणी रखी थी। उस समय उन्होंने कहा था कि पिछले साल सीमा शुल्क की उगाही में २२ प्रतिशत की गिरावट आई थी। उत्पाद शुल्क में ९ फीसदी की गिरावट आई थी, कारपोरेट टैकस में २ फीसदी की गिरावट आई थी, आय कर में १४ प्रतिशत की गिरावट आई थी लेकिन मुझे नहीं लगता कि जिस बालू की दीवार पर खड़े होकर यह इस साल छलांग मारना चाहते हैं उसमें किस तरह व्ृाद्धि होने वाली है। पिछली बार बजट अनुमानों में कहा गया था कि हमारा राजकोषीय घाटा सकल घेरलू उत्पादन के मुकाबले केवल ४.५ फीसदी होगा लेकिन अंतिम निष्कर्ष यह हुआ कि वह घाटा ६.१ फीसदी पर ठहर गया। मुझे यह कहते हुए अफसोस हो रहा है जब आपने इस बात को कहा था, तो बजट बनाते समय उस पर विशेष ध्यान देना चाहिए था लेकिन ऐसा करना आपके लिए संभव नहीं था कयोंकि इस बजट में पूरे तौर पर न तो स्वदेशी का चित्रण है और न श्री मन मोहन सिंह द्वारा चालू की गयी सुधार की जो प्रक़िया थी, वह दृष्िटगत होती है, न चौधरी चरण सिंह द्वारा प्रस्तुत बजट जिसमें किसान दिखलाई पड़ता था, वह दिखता है और न चिदम्बरम साहब का स्वप्न दिखलाई पड़ता है। ऐसा लगता है कि सब कुछ हासिल करने की कोशिश में कुछ भी नहीं प्राप्त हुआ। ऐसा इस बजट से साफ तौर पर दिखलाई पड़ता है। उसकी सबसे प्रमुख बात मैं यही कहना चाहता हूं कि कोई भी कम्युनल सरकार जब तक डसप्िलन्ड नहीं होती, एक विचार की नहीं होती, एक तरह की जवाबदेही नहीं होती तो इस तरह का धोखा उस सरकार के साथ हो सकता है। यह लाज़मी और स्वाभाविक है। इसी टिप्पणी के साथ मैं कुछ बातें कहना चाहता हूं कयोंकि हमारे देश में गरीबी बढ़ रही है। आपने कहा कि इसमें अन्त्योदय है। गरीबी बढ़ रही है और गरीबी केवल लक्षण है। गरीबी बेरोजगारी से पैदा होती है। असल समस्या बेरोजगारी की है। बेरोजगारी दूर हो जाए तो गरीबी खत्म हो जाएगी। लेकिन हमारे देश में गरीबी का प्रतिशत कम हो रहा है, गरीब कम नहीं हो रहे हैं। १९७३-७४ के आंकड़ों के अनुसार हमारे देश में गरीबी की रेखा के नीचे रहने वालों की संख्या ५४-५५ फीसदी थी, आज देखने में लगता है कि वह घटकर ३२-३३ फीसदी हो गई है। लेकिन संख्या नहीं घटी है। उस समय भी ३२-३३ करोड़ लोग गरीबी की रेखा के नीचे थे और आज सारी कोशिश करने के बावजूद इतने ही लोग भारत में गरीबी की रेखा के नीचे हैं। ऐसा होने के पीछे हमारे देश में एकमात्र कारण बढ़ती हुई बेरोजगारी है। सरकार ने अभी दो दिन पहले इसी सदन में इस बात को स्वीकार किया कि सन् २००८ तक हम इस देश में गरीबी को जीरो तक ले आएंगे। लेकिन आपने शुरु कहां से किया। आपने सरकारी नौकरों की सेवा में निव्ृात्ित की उम्र ६० साल कर दी। एक क्षण के लिए कि हमारे बजट में अभी जो घाटा बढ़ने वाला था, पैंशन की राशि इस साल न देनी पड़े, ९०० करोड़ रुपये बहुत अधिक आय नहीं है, सीमित बचत होगी, इसके लिए हम उम्र बढ़ा दें। उम्र बढ़ाने का हमारे देश के रोजगार पर कितना फर्क पड़ेगा, इसके बारे में नहीं सोचा।
  अभी भारत सरकार के श्रम मंत्रालय ने जांच के लिए एक कमेटी बनाई है कि गरीबी की हालत कया है। उनकी जो रिपोर्ट आई है, वे कहते हैं कि संगठित क्षेत्र में रोजगार की हालत पतली हो रही है। सरकारी क्षेत्र में भी हमारी हालत निरंतर खराब हो रही है। कैसे हो रही है। औद्योगिक इकाइयां बंद हो रही हैं, सरकारी क्षेत्र के उद्योगों में लोगों की छटनी हो रही है। उनके अनुसार पिछले दशक यानी १९८० से १९९० के बीच में रोजगार में १.६८ प्रतिशत के हिसाब से व्ृाद्धि थी जो इस दशक में पहले ही सात साल में घटकर ०.८२ प्रतिशत हो गई। सार्वजनिक क्षेत्र के केन्द्रीय और राज्य सरकारों के बीच चलने वाले उपक़मों, स्थानीय निकायों और सरकारी कर्मचारियों को २ करोड़ ८० लाख की जगह १ करोड़ ९० लाख नौकरियां आज मिली हुई हैं, पिछले ढाई-तीन वषर्ों में हमारी नीतियों के चलते इसमें ८० लाख की पहले से ही कमी हो चुकी है। अब आपने सेवा निव्ृात्ित की उम्र ६० साल कर दी। इसके चलते आने वाले दो वषर्ों में सरकारी क्षेत्र, जो सबसे अधिक लोगों को रोजगार मुहैया करता है, में भर्ती की कोई गुंजाइश नहीं रहेगी। सेवा निव्ृात्ित के बाद किसी भी व्यकित को अपनी जीविका चलाने के लिए राजकोष से कुछ मिलता रहता है लेकिन जो व्यकित रोजगारहीन है, नौकरी से बाहर है, नौकरी पाने की अपेक्षा में है, एकदम दरिद्रता के कगार पर रहता है, उसकी परेशानी बढ़ती जाती है। उसका ध्यान किए बिना आपने जो उम्र बढ़ाई है, उसका बहुत बड़ा नुकसान होगा। हमारे देश में रोजगार और नौजवानों को खपत करने का जो सबसे बड़ा साधन था, उसमें कमी आने की संभावनाएं बढ़ गईं।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ){Éä Eò¨ÉÒ¶ÉxÉ EòÒ ºÉÉ®úÒ Ê®úEò¨ÉèÆb÷ä¶ÉxºÉ iÉÉä +É{ÉxÉä xÉ½þÒÆ ¨ÉÉxÉÒÆ* ½þ¨ÉÉ®úä nùä¶É ¨ÉäÆ <iÉxÉÒ UôÖÊ^ªÉÉÆ ½þÉäiÉÒ ½þèÆ, {Éä Eò¨ÉÒ¶ÉxÉ xÉä =ºÉEòÉä JÉi¨É Eò®úxÉä EòÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ Eò½þÒ lÉÒ, EòÉ¨É Eòä PÉÆ]õÉäÆ ¨ÉäÆ ¤ÉgøÉäiÉ®úÒ Eò®úxÉä EòÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ Eò½þÒ lÉÒ* ¤É½þÖiÉ ºÉÉ®úÒ SÉÒVÉäÆ ÊVÉºÉºÉä <ºÉ nùä¶É ¨ÉäÆ ´ÉEòÇ Eò±SÉ®ú b÷è´É±É{É ½þÉäiÉÉ ½þè, +É{ÉxÉä =xÉ ºÉÆºiÉÖÊiÉªÉÉäÆ EòÉä º´ÉÒEòÉ®ú xÉ½þÒÆ ÊEòªÉÉ* +É{ÉxÉä <ºÉÒ ºÉÆºiÉÖÊiÉ EòÉä º´ÉÒEòÉ®ú Eò®úxÉÉ VÉ°ü®úÒ EªÉÉäÆ ºÉ¨ÉZÉÉ ÊVÉºÉEòÉ ºÉÒvÉÉ +ºÉ®ú ½þ¨ÉÉ®úä nùä¶É EòÒ ¦ÉÉ´ÉÒ {ÉÒgøÒ {É®ú {Éc÷xÉä ´ÉÉ±ÉÉ ½þè* =ºÉÒ {É®ú Eò½þxÉÉ SÉÉ½þiÉÉ ½þÚÆ ÊEò ºÉ¤ÉºÉä +ÊvÉEò ±ÉÉäMÉÉäÆ EòÉä ºÉÆMÉÊ`öiÉ IÉäjÉ ¨ÉäÆ JÉ{ÉÉxÉä EòÒ IÉ¨ÉiÉÉ, +ÉètÉäÊMÉEò IÉäjÉ ¨ÉäÆ, ±ÉPÉÖ +ÉètÉäÊMÉEò <EòÉ<ªÉÉäÆ ¨ÉäÆ ½þè* ±ÉäÊEòxÉ VÉèºÉÉ ¨ÉèÆxÉä Eò½þÉ, ºÉ®úEòÉ®ú ¨ÉäÆ Êb÷Êº{ÉÊ±ÉxÉ xÉÉ¨É EòÒ EòÉä<Ç SÉÒVÉ xÉ½þÒÆ ½þè* +ÉÊ¤Énù +±ÉÒ Eò¨Éä]õÒ Eòä ¤ÉÉnù VÉÉä ±ÉPÉÖ <EòÉ<ªÉÉäÆ EòÒ ºÉÒ¨ÉÉ {ÉÚÆVÉÒ Eòä Ê½þºÉÉ¤É ºÉä iÉÒxÉ Eò®úÉäc÷ Eò®úxÉä EòÉ ¡òèºÉ±ÉÉ <ºÉ ºÉ®úEòÉ®ú xÉä ÊEòªÉÉ +Éè®ú =ºÉEòä +ÉvÉÉ®ú {É®ú iÉÒxÉ Eò®úÉäc÷ EòÒ ¤É½þÖiÉ ºÉÉ®úÒ <EòÉ<ªÉÉÆ ºlÉÉÊ{ÉiÉ ½þÉä MÉ<ÇÆ ÊVÉxÉEòÉä ±ÉPÉÖ +ÉètÉäÊMÉEò <EòÉ<ªÉÉäÆ EòÒ ºÉÖÊ´ÉvÉÉ Ê¨É±É MÉ<Ç* ±ÉäÊEòxÉ BEò ºÉ¨¨Éä±ÉxÉ ½þÖ+É ÊVÉºÉ¨ÉäÆ |ÉvÉÉxÉ¨ÉÆjÉÒ VÉÒ MÉB +Éè®ú =x½þÉäÆxÉä =ºÉ ºÉÒ¨ÉÉ EòÉä iÉÒxÉ Eò®úÉäc÷ ºÉä PÉ]õÉEò®ú BEò Eò®úÉäc÷ Eò®ú ÊnùªÉÉ* VÉ¤É =x½þÉäÆxÉä =ºÉ ºÉÒ¨ÉÉ EòÉä PÉ]õÉEò®ú BEò Eò®úÉäc÷ Eò®ú ÊnùªÉÉ iÉÉä ªÉ½þ +{ÉäIÉÉ EòÒ VÉÉiÉÒ lÉÒ ÊEò BEò Eò®úÉäc÷ EòÒ VÉÉä PÉ]õÒ ½þÖ<Ç ºÉÒ¨ÉÉ ½þè, =ºÉEòÉä Ê´ÉiiÉ ¨ÉÆjÉÒ VÉÒ ¦ÉÒ º´ÉÒEòÉ®úiÉä +Éè®ú =ºÉEòÉ =±±ÉäJÉ +{ÉxÉä ¤ÉVÉ]õ ¨ÉäÆ Eò®úiÉä* =tÉäMÉ Ê´É¦ÉÉMÉ =ºÉEòÒ ¶ÉE±É ¨ÉäÆ BEò +Énùä¶É ÊxÉEòÉ±ÉEò®ú =ºÉ Ê½þºÉÉ¤É ºÉä ¤ÉVÉ]õ ¤ÉxÉÉxÉä EòÉ EòÉ¨É Eò®úiÉÉ* ±ÉäÊEòxÉ =tÉäMÉ Ê´É¦ÉÉMÉ xÉä =ºÉ iÉ®ú½þ Eòä +Énùä¶É xÉ½þÒÆ ÊxÉEòÉ±Éä* Ê´ÉiiÉ ¨ÉÆjÉÒ VÉÒ xÉä <ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ EòÉ EòÉä<Ç =±±ÉäJÉ +{ÉxÉä ¤ÉVÉ]õ ¨ÉäÆ xÉ½þÒÆ ÊEòªÉÉ* BEò Ê¤É±EòÖ±É +®úÉVÉEòiÉÉ EòÒ ÊºlÉÊiÉ, VÉÉä Ê´ÉiiÉÒªÉ +xÉÖ¶ÉÉºÉxÉ ½þÉäxÉÉ SÉÉÊ½þB, <ºÉ +{É®úÉ-iÉ¡ò®úÒ Eòä SÉ±ÉiÉä <ºÉ ºÉ®úEòÉ®ú +Éè®ú <ºÉ ¤ÉVÉ]õ ¨ÉäÆ ÊnùJÉÉ<Ç xÉ {Éc÷xÉä Eòä {ÉÒUôä Eò<Ç EòÉ®úhÉÉäÆ ¨ÉäÆ BEò EòÉ®úhÉ ªÉ½þ ¦ÉÒ ½þè* इसलिए मैं कहना चाहता हूं कि अभी आपने बाहर से आने वाली मशीनों पर जो काउंटर वेलिंग डयूटी लगा दी, मुझसे कई ऐसी लघु औद्योगिक इकाई के लोगों ने कहा कि जो ९० लाख की यूनिट हम बाहर से खरीदकर लाएंगे, उसपर हमको जो डयूटी पे करनी पड़ेगी, उसके ऊपर से काउंटर वेलिंग डयूटी पे करनी पड़ेगी तो उसी की कीमत एक करोड़ रुपये से अधिक हो जाएगी और हम लघु औद्योगिक इकाई की सुविधा से वंचित हो जाएंगे। इसलिए इसके बारे में एक समन्िवत सोच और समन्िवत दृष्िट पैदा करने की आवश्यकता है, यह मैं माननीय मंत्री जी से आग्रह करना चाहता हूं। मैं रक्षा बजट के बारे में खास तौर से कहना चाहता हूं। माननीय मंत्री जी इस बात को जोर-जोर से कह रहे हैं कि हमने रक्षा के मद में ४१,००० करोड़ रुपये खर्च करने का फैसला कर लिया। लेकिन मैं आपसे साफ तौर पर कहना चाहता हूं कि रक्षा पर जो खर्चा है, हमारी विदेशी मुद्रा की लगातार जो कीमत घट रही है, उसके रेशियो में यह कुछ भी नहीं है। आपने शिक्षा के बजट में ५० फीसदी व्ृाद्धि कर दी, आणविक ऊर्जा में सौ फीसदी व्ृाद्धि कर दी लेकिन रक्षा के बजट में कुल व्ृाद्धि १४.५ फीसदी हुई। यह जो १४.५ फीसदी की रक्षा में व्ृाद्धि है, सभापति महोदय, मैं आपसे साफ तौर पर कहना चाहता हूं कि हमारी सुरक्षा के अधिकांश उपकरण बाहर से मंगाए जाते हैं। जब हम उनको बाहर से मंगाते हैं तो हमारी मुद्रा की कीमत जो लगातार घट रही है, आज ४२ रुपये से अधिक हो गई है। मार्िकट को ठीक से निरीक्षण करने वालों का कहना है कि आने वाले एक-दो महीने में हमारा डालर के मुकाबले ५० रुपया हो जाएगा। जब हमारा डालर ५० रुपये का हो जाएगा, ऐसी हालत में रक्षा के क्षेत्र में जो व्ृाद्धि है, जिसमें हमारे रक्षा बजट का लगभग ७० फीसदी रक्षा शकित, वाहिनी के वेतन पर और उनकी सुविधा पर जाता है, उसका ११ फीसदी से अधिक पैसा बाहर से खरीदारी पर चला जाता है। हमारे जो नए रक्षात्मक उपाय हैं, कयोंकि आप बार-बार इस बात को कह रहे हैं कि हम दुनिया में एक आणविक शकित बन गए हैं, रक्षा मंत्री जी कहते हैं कि हमने जो नए अनुसंधान और विस्फोट कर लिए हैं, इनको हम अपनी रक्षावाहिनी में शस्त्र के रूप में प्रयोग करने में सक्षम हो गए हैं और हम उसका इस्तेमाल करने के लायक हो जाएंगे। उसका वैपनाईजेशन प्रोसैस कैसे शुरु कर सकते हैं, यह मैं समझ नहीं पा रहा हूं। जिस दिन आपका बजट आया, रक्षा मंत्री जी से उसी दिन यह सवाल किया गया और उन्होंने टेलीविजन के एक इंटरव्यू में कहा कि आज की तारीख में मूल बजट पेश करते समय रक्षा के बजट में भले ही अपेक्षित व्ृाद्धि न हुई हो, लेकिन हमारी वित्त मंत्री जी से वार्ता हो चुकी है, आगे आने वाले दिनों में वे हमारे बजट में व्ृाद्धि करने के लिए तैयार हैं। इसका मतलब यह है कि आपने जिस दिन बजट पेश किया, हमको उसी दिन एक अनुपूरक बजट भी पेश करना है और बहुत सारे विभाग जो आज की तारीख में असंतुष्ट हैं, उनकी पे में हमको व्ृाद्धि करनी है, उसका फैसला आप उसी दिन कर लेते हैं। यह किसी सुयोग्य और सक्षम वित्त मंत्री की ओर से कही हुई बात नहीं हो सकती। कोई भी वित्त मंत्री साल भर की उसकी हर विभाग की कया आवश्यकता है, कया अपेक्षा है, कितना वित्तीय प्रावधान हमको करना आवश्यक है, उसको ठीक से करने की कोशिश करता है। बीच में जब कोई विशेष परस्िथति आ जाती है, आकस्िमक परस्िथति आ जाती है, जिसको बजट तैयार करते समय वित्त मंत्रालय नहीं देख पाता है, वही चीजें यदि अनुपूरक अनुदानों में आयें तो ऐसे वित्त मंत्रालय और ऐसे वित्त मंत्री हमारी समझ में योग्य वित्त मंत्री और योग्य बजट और अच्छा बजट कहा जा सकता है, मैं मानने को तैयार हूं। लेकिन रक्षा के मामले में इस तरह के जो बयान आये, उससे इस बात की सद्धि हो रही है, इस बात की पुष्िट हो रही है कि यह बजट बहुत दिमाग लगाकर, सोच समझकर हमारी साल भर की जो अपेक्षाएं और आवश्यकताएं हैं, उनको ध्यान में रखकर तैयार किया हुआ बजट नहीं है। इसलिए वित्त मंत्री जी इसके बारे में साफ तौर पर मैं आज हमारे देश का जब मैं अपना सकल घरेलू उत्पादन के मुकाबले, जिनको आप भारत का विशेष दुश्मन और यह बहस इस सरकार की ओर से बार-बार चलती है कि कया चीन हमारा नम्बर एक का दुश्मन है, प्रधान मंत्री जी कहते हैं कि हम उसको नम्बर एक का दुश्मन नहीं मानते। नम्बर एक का आप नहीं भी मानते तो कया उसको दुश्मन राष्ट्र मानते हैं कि नहीं? यदि आप दुश्मन राष्ट्र भी नहीं मानते तो आज की तारीख में हम आपकी कुछ चीजों के चलते मित्र राष्ट्र भी मानने की स्िथति में नहीं रह गये हैं और उसके बारे में अभी जो जैन साहब कह रहे थे कि एक साम्यवाद का शिराजा साम्राज्य का जो ढह गया और दुनिया से साम्यवाद नष्ट हो गया। ऐसी बात मानने के लिए मेरे पास पूरा आधार नहीं है। सामयवादी देश चीन भी है और उसके बारे में आज दुनिया के अर्थशास्त्रियों और खास तौर से अमेरिकी अर्थशास्त्री इस बात की घोषणाएं कर रहे हैं कि आने आने वाले वषर्ों में, यानी २०२१ और २०२२ तक दुनिया की आज जो एक नम्बर की आर्िथक शकित अमेरिका की है, चीन भी लगभग उसके बराबर हो जायेगा, ऐसी भविष्यवाणियां लोग करने लगे हैं और अमेरिका के ही लोग इस बात को कहने लगे हैं कि सन् २०२१ के बाद यह स्िथति आ सकती है कि शायद चीन दुनिया का नम्बर एक का देश हो जाये, ऐसी भी स्िथति आ सकती है, कुछ अर्थशास्त्रियों का ऐसा भी आकलन है तो जब ऐसा आकलन है और उसको आप मित्र राष्ट्र बनाकर नहीं रख सकते तो उसके मुकाबले जो रक्षात्मक तैयारी है, यह भारत सरकार की जिम्मेदारी होती है कि इस देश की और दुनिया को बतलाने का काम करे। इस देश और दुनिया को यह बतलाने का काम करे कि जिसको हम ग्ृाह मंत्री जी जब यहां पर उस बहस के ऊपर भाषण कर रहे थे, जिस समय आणविक विस्फोट हुआ था, तो उनकी बात से, उनकी व्यंजना से इस बात की ध्वनि निकली कि हमारा दुश्मन नम्बर एक चीन नहीं, पाकिस्तान है और यदि पाकिस्तान ही है तो आज की तारीख में वह अपने सकल घरेलू उत्पादन के मुकाबले में लगभग ७.५ फीसदी रक्षा के ऊपर खर्च कर रहा है और आप कितना कर रहे हैं? हम अपने ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री चन्द्रशेखर साहू: ग्ृाह मंत्री ने पाकिस्तान को दुश्मन नम्बर एक नहीं कहा।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) सभापति महोदय : आप बैठिये।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री मोहन सिंह : नहीं, मैंने यह नहीं कहा कि उन्होंने कहा। उनकी जो व्यंजना, उनकी जो ध्वनि थी, उनकी बात के कहने का जो ढंग था, उससे जो एक निष्कर्ष और नहितार्थ निकला, उससे मैंने जो अर्थ निकाला, वह यह है। लेकिन यदि ऐसा नहीं है तो अच्छी बात है।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री रतिलाल कालीदास वर्मा : ग्ृाह मंत्री के नाम पर ऐसा अर्थ निकालना ठीक नहीं है।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री चन्द्रशेखर साहू (महासमुन्द): यह सेंसटिव मैटर है।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री मोहन सिंह (देवरिया): मेरे कहने का मतलब यह है ... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री रतिलाल कालीदास वर्मा : आपका मतलब ठीक है। सभापति महोदय, ये शब्द कार्यवाही से निकाले जायें।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री राजेन्द्र अग्िनहोत्री (झांसी): मोहन सिंह जी, ये आपके विचार हो सकते हैं, लेकिन ग्ृाह मंत्री जी के द्वारा न तो इस प्रकार की बात कही गई, न ऐसी धवनि थी, न यह कहना कि कोई इस प्रकार के विचार हैं, ये शब्द इस प्रकार होने चाहिए कि यह मोहन सिंह जी के विचार हैं, यह ग्ृाह मंत्री जी के विचार लिखना ठीक नहीं है।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री रतिलाल कालीदास वर्मा : सभापति महोदय, ग्ृाह मंत्री के नाम पर यह कहना ठीक नहीं है। ये शब्द कार्यवाही से निकाले जायें।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) सभापति महोदय : आप बैठिये न।
... (´ªÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ) श्री मोहन सिंह : तो ठीक है, मैं यह नहीं कह रहा हूं। मैं केवल इतनी बात कहना चाहता हूं कि कया इनके भाषण से अर्थ निकालने का अधिकार मुझे नहीं है, निष्कर्ष निकालने का अधिकार नहीं है? मेरे कहने का मतलब यही है कि जिन राष्ट्रों से हम अपनी प्रतियोगिता मानते हैं और समझते हैं, वे अपने सकल घरेलू उत्पादन का कितने फीसदी रक्षा के ऊपर खर्च कर रहे हैं और आप कितने फीसदी खर्च करने जा रहे हैं और उतने कम खर्चे के ऊपर आप दुनिया की एक महान शकित, आगे ऐसा कहकर माला पूरे देश में पहन रहे हैं, मेरे कहने का आशय यह है और मैं इस बात को कहना चाहता हूं। इसलिए मैं साफ तौर पर वित्त मंत्री जी से आग्रह करना चाहता हूं कि या तो भारत के और देश के रक्षा का दो तरह का उपयोग करें, आप अपने पड़ौसी देशों से सम्बन्ध सुधारें, जैसा पिछली अपनी दो पूर्ववर्ती सरकारों ने किया कि हमने अपने पड़ौसी देशों से अच्छे सम्बन्ध बनाकर रखे। हमने इस बात का दुनिया के सामने एलान कर दिया कि हमारे पड़ौसियों से अब किसी तरह के झगड़े नहीं हैं। यदि कोई विवाद भी हैं तो उसको सामरिक शकित से आतंक और उन्माद पैदा करके नहीं, बल्िक आपसी बातचीत से हल करेंगे और हमारे सारे पड़ौसियों से अच्छे सम्बन्ध हैं, या तो इस स्िथति को आप लागू करिये, इसको परस्यू करिये, इसपर अमल करने का काम करिये और यदि ऐसा नहीं है और एक ऐसा उन्माद पूरे देश में और पूरे उपमहाद्वीप में आप खड़ा करें कि जैसे जंग की स्िथति इस पूरे उपमहाद्वीप में है तो ऐसी हालत में हम भारत को एक मजबूत सामरिक दृष्िट से मजबूत राष्ट्र बनायें, यह कोशिश हमारी ओर से होनी चाहिए और उस कोशिश का कोई लक्षण इनके इस रक्षा बजट में दिखाई नहीं पड़ता, ऐसा मैं कहना चाहता हूं। उसी के साथ-साथ मैं कहना चाहता हूं कि अनिवासी भारतीयों के लिए बहुत कुछ प्रलोभन और बहुत कुछ बातें वित्त मंत्री जी ने अपने इस बजट में रखने की कोशिश की है, लेकिन दुनिया में कहीं भी जिस तरह के अनिवासी भारत में हैं, दुनिया के दूसरे देशों में नहीं हैं। आज पूरे पूर्वी एशिया का व्यापार लाभ सिंगापुर हो, हांगकांग तो अब चीन के पास चला ही गया, वर्मा का व्यापार हो, थाईलैंड का व्यापार हो, दूसरी बात आपने कही है कि वह जो पूंजी हम लगाएंगे, अनिवासी भारतीय यहां लगाएंगे, उससे जो उनको आमदनी होगी, उस आमदनी को अपने देश में ले जाने की भी उनको छूट होगी। इस छूट के मैं खिलाफ हूं और यदि इस तरह की छूट आप देंगे तो यदि किसी तरह की परेशानी भारत में होगी, किसी तरह का आर्िथक दबाव और तनाव पैदा होगा और उस तारीख में, उस स्िथति में हमारे वे अनिवासी भारतीय अपनी उस कमाई को, उस पूंजी को भारत से जिस देश में आज की तारीख में वे हैं, ले जाने लगेंगे तो कया हमारी भी वही स्िथति नहीं हो सकती, जो मलेशिया की हो गई? दो साल, तीन साल पहले मलेशिया को हमारे पूर्वी एशिया में एक ऐसा उभरता हुआ राष्ट्र था, जिसकी बढ़ती हुई आर्िथक शकित के बारे में लोग अनुमान करने लगे थे कि पूर्वी एशिया का सबसे बड़ा मजबूत राष्ट्र होने वाला है, लेकिन पिछले एक साल के अन्दर उसका शिराजा ढह गया, उसकी सारी पूंजी, उसकी मुद्रा का इतना अवमूल्यन हो गया, उसकी सारी पूंजी इतनी बाहर होने लगी कि उसको हम आज उभरते हुए राष्ट्र के रूप में देखने से कतराने लगे। बार-बार इस सदन में पिछले सालों में इन्कम टैकस की लमिट ६० हजार रुपये पर हो, इसकी मांग की गई। आपने अपने घोषणा-पत्र में इस बार कह दिया कि एक लाख रुपये पर हो और इसी सरकार के एक मंत्री जी ने सूरत में जाकर इस बात की घोषणा कर दी कि इस बार जो बजट आ रहा है, उसमें इन्कम टैकस लमिट ६० हजार रुपये कर दी गई है। इस तरह की घोषणाएं मंत्री बजट से पूर्व करें, यह बात समझ में नहीं आती। मैं मांग करना चाहता हूं कि आपने जो ५० हजार रुपये की सीमा की है, इसमें बढ़ोतरी होनी चाहिए।
21.00 hrs. दूसरी बात मैं कहना चाहता हूं कि आपने कुछ चीजों पर उत्पाद कर बढ़ा दिए। जैसे आपने चाय पर बढ़ा दिया, ब्रांडेड मकखन पर टैकस लगा दिया। सभापति महोदय : आप खत्म कर रहे हैं? श्री मोहन सिंह (देवरिया): पांच-सात मिनट में खत्म कर दूंगा। सभापति महोदय: ठीक है, आप पांच-सात मिनट में अभी खत्म कर दें। श्री मोहन सिंह : सभापति जी, वित्त मंत्री ने कह दिया कि देश का गरीब आदमी मकखन नहीं खाता तो उस पर कर बढ़ा देंगे, इससे खास मुद्रास्फीति पर असर नहीं पड़ेगा। श्री चन्द्रशेखर साहू : मकखन तो राजनीति में लगता है।
  श्री मोहन सिंह : उन्होंने अखबार में कहा जब उनसे पूछा गया कि आपने ब्रांडेड मकखन पर टैकस बढ़ा दिया है, तो उन्होंने कहा मकखन गरीब नहीं खाता। डेयरी वाले इस बढ़े हुए कर को लेकर आंदोलन कर रहे हैं और हड़ताल पर जा रहे हैं। वे कह रहे हैं कि हमारी मशीनरी पर डयूटी लग गई उससे हमारा नुकसान होने वाला है। चाय आम आदमी की चीज है। उसको भी आपने लकजरी गुडस में गिन लिया। जो आम उपभोग की वस्तुएं हैं उन पर उत्पाद कर बढ़ाकर मुद्रास्फीति नहीं बढ़ेगी, इस बात की आप कल्पना करते हैं। मेरा कहना है कि यह वास्तविकता के विपरीत है। बहुत सारे लोगों ने भविष्यवाणी करनी शुरू कर दी है कि आने वाले दो-तीन महीनों में मुद्रस्फीति की दर दो अंकों में हो जाएगी। इसलिए मैं वित्त मंत्री जी से कहूंगा कि इस पर गम्भीरतापूर्वक विचार करें कि जो आवश्यक उपभोकता वस्तुएं हैं उनके ऊपर बढ़ी हुई डयूटी वापस लें। पैट्रोल के ऊपर चार-पांच घंटे इस देश में हंगामा खड़ा हो गया। १९८८ के बाद लगातार आम बजट से पैट्रोल और डीजल की कीमतों को अलग रखा जाता था। उसका बजट से पहले प्रशासकीय मूल्य निर्धारित होता था। पिछली मोर्चा सरकार ने अच्छा काम किया और यह कहा कि तेल पूल घाटे की पूर्ित की जिम्मेदारी हमारी नहीं होगी, तेल कम्पनी को इसके लिए छूट है। इस तरह उसको मुकत कर दिया था और राजकोषीय खाते में किसी दबाव की आशंका नहीं थी। लेकिन इस बार बजट पेश करते हुए आपने पैट्रोल को उसमें सम्िमलित कर दिया। आपने घोषणा की कि एक रुपया प्रति लीटर और टैकस लिया जाएगा। सारी तेल कम्पनीज ने इसका फायदा उठाते हुए कहीं पर चार रुपये और कहीं पर पांच रुपये वसूल किए। इस पर सदन में हंगामा हुआ और आपने स्वीकार किया। पैट्रोलियम मनिस्टर ने देश के सामने टी.वी. पर इंटरव्यू देते हुए कहा कि यह हमारी गलती से बढ़ गया। दुनिया के किसी भी जागरूक देश का कोई मंत्री अगर यह कहता कि हमारी वजह से पूरे देश के करोड़ों रुपये लूट लिए गए तो उस देश की जागरूक जनता उस मंत्री को स्वीकार नहीं करती। लेकिन इस देश में यह सम्भव है। मैं आग्रह करना चाहूंगा कि पहले जो एक सिलसिला शुरू हुआ था तेल पूल के घाटे को बजट से नहीं, तेल कम्पनी स्वयं पूरा करें, उसे मान्य कीजिए। इससे २००१ तक तेल पूल पूर्णरूप से स्वतंत्र हो जाएगा। इसलिए इस प्रक़िया को आप किसी भी रूप में बाधित करने की कोशिश न करें। यूरिया के दाम के बारे में निरंतर कहा गया। कम से कम बजट प्रस्तुत करने के पहले आपने अपने घटक दलों से परामर्श ही कर लिया होता। आपके दो समर्थक दलों की राज्य सरकारों, हरियाणा और पंजाब के मुख्यमंत्रीयों ने बयान दिया कि बढ़ी हुई दर नहीं रखनी चाहिए। आपके एक अन्य प्रमुख दल की नेता ने तमिलनाडू से घोषित किया कि यूरिया पर बढ़ी हुई दर हम स्वीकार नहीं करेंगे, इसको नहीं बढ़ाया जाना चाहिए। समता पार्टी की भी यही राय है, ममता बनर्जी की भी यही राय है। जब सरकार और पार्टी में आपस में समन्वय नहीं रहेगा तो काम करना मुश्िकल होगा और सदन में आप बिना समर्थकों की राय के ऐसी घोषणा कर देंगे, इससे आपकी बदनामी होगी और इज्जत को चोट लगेगी। मैं आग्रह करना चाहूंगा कि भविष्य में इस तरह के वित्तीय प्रस्ताव रखते हुए सरकार से जिस वित्तीय अनुशासन की अपेक्षा की जाती है, उसको ध्यान में रखते हुए वित्तीय प्रावधान किये जाएंगे। आपने किन्हीं दबावों के चलते हुए यह किया, जबकि चीजों के दाम किवंटल और टनों पर बढ़ाए जाते हैं, लेकिन आपने यूरिया पर प्रति किलो पर एक रुपया बढ़ा दिया। दूसरे दिन आपने ५० पैसे घटा दिए। मैं पूछना चाहता हूं कि बाकी के ५० पैसे आपने किस खुशी में लगाए हुए हैं। मैं आग्रह करना चाहूंगा कि इसको पूर्णरूप से वापस लिया जाए। यह सरकार इस सदन और देश के सामने सामूहिक रूप से बोलने की आदत सीखे और सरकार में जो अनुशासन की फंकशनिंग होती है उसके हिसाब से काम करने के तौर-तरीके सीखे, तब मैं समझूंगा और देश के सामने इस तरह अपमानित होने की सीधी जिम्मेदारी वित्त मंत्री के सामने नहीं आएगी। इन्हीं शब्दों के साथ मैं इस बजट का घोर विरोध करते हुए अपनी बात समाप्त करता हूं।
21.05 hrs The Lok Sabha then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock on Thursday, June 11, 1998/Jyaistha 21, 1920 (Saka) _______
