Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/3416/
Cites: ['Krishnan vs Mohammed on 21 November, 2005 : https://indiankanoon.org/doc/920825/']
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Supreme Court of India
Eapan Thomas vs Syed Mohammed Kunju Mohammed ... on 13 March, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1553, 1992 SCR (2) 307
Author: M Punchhi
Bench: Punchhi, M.M.
           PETITIONER:
EAPAN THOMAS

 Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SYED MOHAMMED KUNJU MOHAMMED KUNJU

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/03/1992

BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1553    1992 SCR  (2) 307
 1992 SCC  (2) 721   JT 1992 (2) 374
 1992 SCALE  (1)740


ACT:
     Kerala Agriculturists Debt Relief Act, 1970-Section 20-
Debt Relief Petition under-Requirement for  maintainability-
Object  of   Legislation-Inter-pretation   beneficial   to
peasantry  to  be accepted-Cost of  Improvements  and  mesne
profits whether payable.



HEADNOTE:
     In  execution  of a money decree,  a  court-sale took
place.  Three pieces of agricultural land of the  judgment-
debtor-respondent  were put to auction.  The  decree-holder-
appellant purchased the same.
     Item Nos.1 and 2 of the auctioned property remained  in
possession  of the respondent, but item no. 3 went into  the
possession of the appellant.
     The respondent approached the executing court filing  a
petition u/s. 20 of the Kerala Agriculturists Act, 1970, for
retrieval  of the entire property on the basis that  he  had
continued to be in possession of a part of it.
     The  appellant  contested the  Debt  Relief   Petition
contending  that as the respondent was not in possession  of
the entire property, Section 20 of the Act was inapplicable
and that in case it was then before possession of  property,
item no. 3 could be asked to be given, cost of improvements
had to be paid under sub-section (5) of Section 20.
     All the courts below decided against the appellant.
     This appeal by special leave was confined to a claim to
property Item No. 3 of the Debt Relief Petition.
     Dismissing the appeal of the decree-holder, this Court,
     HELD : 1.01. The Kerala Agriculturists Debt Relief  Act
is a local legislation and had come to give some succour  to
the  indebted agriculturists.  The conditions which  led  to
the passing of such legislation
        308
presumably  were well known to the Kerala State  Legislature
and the pulse of it was felt by the High Court Kerala in its
Interpretive role. [309D]
     1.02. The sale conceived of under Section 20 is one and
indivisible  and when it is required to be set aside only  a
portion  of the property  sold need be in possession of  the
judgment-debtor  to make him eligible to maintain  the Debt
Relief Petition. [309E]
     1.03.  An interpretation, beneficial as it is  to  the
indebted peasantry is approved.  The courts below as well as
the  High Court let the respondent maintain his Debt  Relief
Petition.   Such  a  course  is  concurred  with.   Sequally
property item no. 3 has also to be retrieved from the  hands
of the appellant. [309F]
     1.04.  In the  interests of justice,  neither  is  the
appellant  held  entitled to any cost  of  improvements  nor
would he be liable for payment of any mesne profits for  the
preceding three years. [310A-B]
     Syed  Mohammed Beevi Amma v. Mathai Devasia, 1960  KLT
163;  Ramasuppa  Iyer v. Daveed Christudas,  1963  KLT 886,
approved.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2578 of 1980.
From the Judgment and Order dated 9th June, 1980 of the High Court of Kerala at Ernaculam in C.R.P. No. 3168 of 1978.
S. Padmanabhan and E.M.S. Anam for the Appellant. K.M.K. Nair for the Respondent.
The Order of the Court was delivered:
The appeal by special leave is confined to a claim to property Item No. 3 of the Debt Relief Petition, which succeeded in th courts below.
In execution of a money decree a court-sale took place in which three pieces of agricultural land of the judgment- debtor, respondent herein, was put to auction and purchased by the decree-holder, the appellant herein. On the facts found by the courts below item Nos. 1 and 2 of the auctioned property remained in possession of the respondent, but item No. 3 went into the possession of the appellant. The respondent taking the aid of Section 20 of the Kerala Agriculturists Debt Relief Act, 1970, approached the executing court for retrieval of the entire property on the basis that he had continued to be in possession of atleast a part of it, i.e., two survey numbers as itemized. The Debt Relief Petition was contested by the appellant herein on the ground that since the judgment- debtor-respondent was not in possession of the entire property, Section 20 of the aforesaid Act was inapplicable and in case it was then before possession of property item No. 3 could be asked to be given cost of improvements had to be paid under sub-section (5) of Section 20, which the appellant assessed at Rs. 2,000. All the courts below inclusive of the High Court have gone against the appellant and the dispute herein, as said before, is confined to property item No. 3.
The above-named Act is a local legislation and had come to give some succour to the indebted agriculturists. The conditions which led to the passing of such legislation presumably were well known to the Kerala State Legislature and the pulse of it was felt by the High Court of Kerala in its interpretive role. There are two decisions of that Court in support of the claim of the respondent. The first one is by a Division Bench, i.e., 1960 KLT 163 titled Syed Mohammed Beevi Amma v. Mathai Devasia followed by a single bench in 1963 KLT 886 titled Ramasuppa Iyer v. Daveed Christudas (even though passed on the earlier statute) wherein it has been held that the sale conceived of under Section 20 is one and indivisible and when it is required to be set aside only a portion of the property sold need be in possession of the judgment-debtor to make him eligible to maintain the Debt Relief Petition. These two decisions have governed the field without any discordant note in that State. We will rather frown on setting aside such an interpretation, beneficial as it is to the indebted peasantry. The courts below as well as the High Court followed these decisions in letting the respondent maintain his Debt Relief petition. We concur with such a course. Sequally property item No. 3 has also to be retrieved from the hands of the appellant. We order accordingly maintaining the judgment and orders of the courts below.
The appellant laid a claim of Rs. 2,000 for improvements wayback in the year 1970. A period of over 20 years has passed by. It would be fair to presume that the appellant has derived the fruits of the improvements in these past years. It would also be fair correspondingly to assume that on the maintenance of the orders of the courts below he would be liable to pay mesne profits for the preceding three years on having remained in possession of the property item No. 3. We square these two claims in the interests of justice and close the matter. Neither is the appellant held entitled to any cost of improvements nor would he be liable for payment of any mesne profits for the preceding three years. There would correspondingly be a duty on the respondent.
For the aforesaid reasons this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed but added with the above directions and without any order as to costs.
V.P.R.        Appeal dismissed.
