Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1318/
Cites: []
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Lok Sabha Debates
Request The Government To Confer The Highest Title Â€˜Bharat ... on 24 July, 2001
Title: Request the Government to confer the highest title ‘Bharat Ratna’ posthumously and to release a stamp in honour of Sivaji Ganesan.
SHRI VAIKO (SIVAKASI): Mr. Deputy-Speaker, Sir, July 21st, the Saturday, is the most sorrowful day in the State of Tamil Nadu. The greatest actor of our times, `Nadigar Thilagam’ Sivaji Ganesan, the thespian, passed away on this sorrowful day. Millions and millions have paid their homage; and leaders of all political parties have paid their homage.
Sivaji Ganesan when he played the role of Chattrapati Sivaji in a play, it was Thanthai Periyar, the greatest champion of social justice, who conferred the title `Sivaji’. He could excel all the Hollywood actors. Arignar Anna, founder and late lamented leader, once gave a fitting description – Marlon Brando, if he tries his best, he could act like Sivaji Ganesan. He had played the roles of all the heroes of our freedom struggle. He is a versatile personality. He presented himself in the celluloid field for 50 years. There is no one equal to him. Therefore, in the Afro-Asian film Festival, he was conferred the highest title by Nazer. The French Government conferred `Chevalier’ on him. India also conferred on him Padma Sri and Padma Bhushan.
Sir, it is high time, the Government of India should confer the highest title `Bharat Ratna’ posthumously on Sivaji Ganesan. I would seek the support of the Members belonging to all political parties to this demand. I would also request the hon. Parliamentary Affairs Minister to convey the requests of the Tamilians of the State to the Prime Minister so that our wishes would be fulfilled. … (Interruptions)
SHRI K. YERRANNAIDU (SRIKAKULAM): We associate ourselves with the sentiments expressed by Shri Vaiko.
SHRI VARKALA RADHAKRISHNAN (CHIRAYINKIL): We fully support it.
SHRI MANI SHANKAR AIYAR (MAYILADUTURAI): On behalf of the Tamil Nadu Congress MPs, we wish to associate ourselves with the sentiments as well as the desire expressed by Shri Vaiko.
SHRI E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN (SIVAGANGA): Late Sivaji Ganesan was a Member of the Rajya Sabha. He had also worked for the national integration for about 50 years as a Member of the Indian National Congress. Whenever there was a war with China and other countries, he created awareness about protecting the Indian territory throughout India. Therefore, he should be awarded a befitting award so that the future world remembers Sivaji Ganesan forever.
I would request the Ministry of Communications to release a stamp in honour of Sivaji Ganesan.
SHRI C. KUPPUSAMI (MADRAS NORTH): Mr. Deputy-Speaker, Sir, the whole nation was grieved over the loss of a great patriotic Indian, the glorious matinee idol from Tamil Nadu, Padma Bhushan Sivaji Ganesan who carved out a niche for himself in the cine field by acting in more than 350 films in different roles. It was a great loss to the entire people of Tamil Nadu and to the entire cine field. He was the inspiration for many aspiring stars.
Sivaji Ganesan won several awards including the Dada Saheb Phalke Award and the international Chevalier Award given by the French Government.… (Interruptions)
MR. DEPUTY-SPEAKER: You should know the procedure. Shri Kuppusami, please continue.
SHRI C. KUPPUSAMI : So, Sir, I request the House through you that by way of paying homage to this great son of India and in recognition of his services, I appeal to the Government of India to confer the highest civilian award, "Bharat Ratna", on him posthumously and also to release postal stamps in his honour and memory. Thank you.
