Meta Data
DocType: Judgement
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/3818/
Cites: []
+++++++++++++++++++++++++


Central Information Commission
Mr.P Suresh Babu vs Ministry Of Home Affairs on 1 April, 2010
                         Central Information Commission
                   Room No. 5, Club Building, Near Post Office
                    Old J.N.U. Campus, New Delhi - 110067
                               Tel No: 26161997

                                                             Case No. CIC/WB/A/2009/000229

        Name of Appellant                                :       Sh. P. Suresh Babu

        Name of Respondent                               :       M/o Home Affairs



Background
The Appellant, Sh. P. Suresh Babu, General Secretary, Akhil Bhartiya Operational  Staff   Association   Directorate   of   Coordination   (Police   Wireless),   had   filed   an  application dated 18.09.2008 under the RTI Act. seeking information on various  issues   concerning   Technical   staff   working   in   the   Directorate   of   Coordination  (Police   Wireless),   M/o   Home   Affairs.     The   CPIO/   Directorate   of   Coordination  (Police Wireless) vide his letter dated 15.10.2008 provided information at point no.  1, 2, 3, 5(a&b) and 6 of the RTI application, while informing the Appellant that  information on other points were being obtained from the concerned sections of  the Directorate.  Subsequently, reply to point no. 10(a & b), 11 & 12 and to point  no.   3   were     provided.     The   Appellant   thereafter   filed   a   first   appeal   dated  24.10.2008   before   the   First   Appellate   Authority   (FAA)/Jt.   Director   Coordination  (Police & Wireless), submitting therein that information sought at query nos. 4, 7, 8  & 9 had not been furnished by the CPIO, and that incomplete, not to the point and  misleading replies had been provided on various other points.  The FAA vide his  order dated 20.11.2008 replied to query no. 4, 7, 8 & 9 and also clarified  / upheld  the replies of the CPIO on various other points.  The Appellant has thereafter, filed  a second appeal before the Commission, wherein he submits that the Respondent  has provided misleading / false / not to the have point information to query no.  8(a), 8(b), 9, 10(a), 11 and 12 and denied information to query at point no.  7(a & 
b) and 13 of the RTI Application. 
2. The matter was heard on 20.01.2010
3. Sh. P. Suresh Babu, the Appellant was present.
4. Sh. P. K. Singh, Director, Sh. M.S.N. Swamy, Dy. Director, Sh. C. P.S. 
Nagra, A.D.(M) and Sh. Phool Kumar, A.D. represented the Respondent  Public Authority.
The points raised in the second appeal and the para­wise comments provided by  the Respondent are as follows:­  Query No. 7(a):­ "Is it true that discrimination is offence as per Indian  Constitution?
Query No. 7(b):­ Is it true that equal wages for equal works are natural justice? Comments of the Respondent:­ The  Respondent  have  held  that  "the   information  sought  does  not  come  under the purview of the RTI Act, 2005.  Hence, no comments." Query   No.   13:­    "As   per   Recruitment   Rules   of   Senior   Technical   Assistant,  Wireless Supervisor and Technical Assistance are also eligible for promotion if  they  have  passed  Grad­I  Radio Technician Test.    Similarly as  per  the  R.R.  of  Senior Supervising Officer, TA (M) and TA are also eligible for promotion if they  have passed Grad­I Wireless Operator test.  But Wireless Operators and T.A. from  Operational Side are not being provided the Grad­I Radio Technician Course and  vice versa.   Kindly intimate as to why Wireless Supervisors and TA who have  passed Grad­I Operational Test are not being called for Grad­I Radio Technician  Course and vice versa."
Comments of the Respondent:­ As per the Right to Information Act, 2005, the applicant is required to explore the  channel   of   first   Appellate   Authority   for   providing   the   desired   information   if   the  applicant is not satisfied with the reply of CPIO. In this case, the applicant has not  explore the channel & scope for obtaining the information from the first Appellate  Authority."
The Appellant has also expressed his dissatisfaction with the information  provided to query no 8(a), 8(b), 10(a), 11 & 12 of his RTI application.   Query No. 8(a & b):­  "Kindly intimate the reason as to why a Wireless Operator is  getting promotion years later than a Radio Technician when both are having equal  wages in lieu of equal works and when both Operational and Maintenance Wings  are identical limps of Technical Cadre?
8(b): Kindly   intimate   the   reasons   as   to   why   Operational   Staff   are   being  discriminated in promotional avenues in DCPW?"
Information   Provided:­The   Wireless   Operators   and   Radio   Technicians   are  promoted to their next higher grade as per Recruitment Rules of the post as and  when vacancy(s) arise.
8(b):­ As such no discrimination."
Query No. 10(a):­   "As per the Guidelines of DOP&T, Cadre Review should be  carried   out   in   all   Departments   in   every  five   years.     If   the   guidelines/orders  of  DOP&T  are   applicable  to   all   departments,  kindly  intimate  as  to   why  no   Cadre  Review has been taken place in DCPW ever since its inception as stated by Sh.  Sher Singh, the then J.D.(Admn.) in one his file noting." Information Provided:­  "Although efforts were made earlier, but because of the  complexities in the work force of DCPW could not materialize.   However, an in­ house committee has recently been set up in this regard." Query No. 11:­  "A Departmental Committee comprising of eight members was set  up for examining the feasibility of merger of Operational, Maintenance and Cipher  Wing in DCPW. As per the minutes of the meeting, the view of six members were  in   supportive   to   the   merger   of   three   wings.     Only   two   members   (General  Secretaries of Maintenance and cipher Associations) have opposed the merger.  Kindly intimate whether the decision of a Departmental Committee is as per the  views of majority members of the committee or the committee will be dissolved for  want   of   a   unanimous   decision,   which   may   result   into   the   interest   of   minority  member? Kindly intimate the guidelines/procedures of a Departmental Committee  in arriving a decision.
Information provided: "The Committee have recommended for dissolution due to  non arrival of unanimous decision."
Query   No.  12:­    "The total numbers of posts of  Senior  Technical Assistant of  DCPW is 45 and the total number of posts of Technical Assistant (Maintenance),  which   is   the   feeder   post   of   Senior   Technical   Assistant,   is   49.     A   proposal  demanding 15 more posts of STA for Disaster Management is also under process.  At   present,   the   ratio   of   number  of   post   of   STA  is   to   number  of   TA(M)  is   1:1  approximately.  If 15 more posts of STA will be sanctioned, the ratio will become  60:49 (the Pyramid will become inverted).  As per the guidelines of Department of  Personnel & Training, Para 3.12.2 of OM No. AB­14017/12/87­Estt® Dated 18th  March,   1988,   "feeder   grade   should   range   from   3   to   5   times   the   number   of  sanctioned posts in the higher grade". As per the norms of UPSC/SSC/DOPT, if  sufficient numbers of feeder posts are not available for promotion to a higher post,  i.e. if the ratio, some of the posts should be earmarked for Direct Recruitment  thought U.P.S.C. or Staff Selection Commission, kindly intimate the reason as to  why 50% or sufficient percentage posts of Senior Technical Assistant has not been  earmarked for Direct Recruitment thorough UPSC or Staff Selection Commission  when there are crores of qualified persons seeking for a job in the country." Information provided:­ "The  posts of STAs are created by concerned authority  as per job requirement and filled adhering to the Recruitment Rules of the post in  DCPW."
Decision In reply to this query No. 13 the Respondent have only submitted that the  Appellant has not explored the channel for obtaining the desired information from  the First Appellate Authority.  The Commission does not find merit in the plea the  Respondent.     The   Appellant   had   in   fact   filed   a   first   appeal   before   the   First  Appellate Authority (FAA) who should have ensured that an appropriate reply was  provided.    The   FAA  is  therefore,  directed  to   provide  the   requisite   reply  to   the  Appellant within 15 days of receipt of the order of the Commission.
However, the Commission does not find any reason to   interfere in any of  the   other   replies   of   the   Respondent.   With   these   observations/   directions,   the  matter is disposed of accordingly.
                                                                            (Sushma Singh)                                                                           Information Commissioner  1.04.2010  
